# Andrew Huberman: Focus, Stress, Relationships, and Friendship | Lex Fridman Podcast #277

Video ID: lvh3g7eszVQ?si=4KhQSVf_IRGsJ33m

## Transcript

if you get into the sauna the way i just described not the two hours a day but
30 minutes twice a week or three times per week you reduce the likelihood of
dying of a cardiovascular event by 27 percent if you do it four or more times
per week you reduce the probability of dying by 50 is there any scientific
evidence that being naked is beneficial in the sauna well in certain contexts it
leads to um childbirth okay well i'll have to read up on that i think dorothy
parker said the cure for boredom is curiosity there's no cure for curiosity the
following is a conversation with andrew huberman his third time on this podcast
he's a brilliant neuroscientist at stanford university and the host of one of
the best the best if you ask me health and science podcast in the world called
hubermann lab podcast check him out on instagram twitter and youtube most
importantly andrew is a great human being and has quickly become a great friend
this is the lex friedman podcast to support it please check out our sponsors in
the description and now dear friends here's andrew huberman we meet again my
friend uh we should talk on each other's podcast once a year i think we should
make a deal i was just talking to the guys this show called louis i don't know
if you know it and okay yeah with louis ck and there's this thing called bang
bang which people are probably watching know exactly what i'm talking about it's
this worst possible thing you can do in terms of meals which is you go to a
restaurant do a full meal and then go to another restaurant and do a full meal
and you pat that's exactly brutal so they go mexican italian sushi pizza
barbecue ihop that that one is disgusting this kind of thing reminds me of the
joy of food last time we were hanging out we went we went to see joe do comedy
and then we went to eat russian food yeah and it was a particularly experience
to go to a russian restaurant i was the only person there that didn't speak
russian yeah and eat russian food with you and um because i felt walking in they
they trusted you they didn't trust me yeah the funny thing about the the people
there they were talking to you in russian and then they refused to sort of uh
switch to english even though they understood you speak no russian this is
russian house in austin by the way uh anyway what by way of question what's the
worst or or the best depending on your perspective cheat meal let's call it a
pigging out meal but it could be a cheap meal uh that you've ever had or you
want to have that's like on the bucket list or something that's in the past like
where you did the something like a bang bang which is like you're talking about
multiple thousands of calories that you just feel horrible about yourself you
still keep eating because it's delicious but also great company something about
the atmosphere is just right screw the diet screw all the things you know just
like you should be doing but just throw it all out the window i've done that
several times yeah i don't do this anymore but um the entire time i was a
postdoc so five years and the entire time i was a pre-tenured professor so five
years so i basically followed the tim ferriss slow carb diet which is you know
people can look it up but it worked really well it was basically some you know
like good animal proteins you know fish and meat and things like that low
carbohydrate slow carbs like low glycemic stuff is mostly lentils and beans and
things and vegetables no no dairy no um anyway but then why in there sorry to
interrupt no no pasta so it wasn't low carb it was low glycemic carb and i did
that and it worked terrifically well just for energy levels because i want to be
able to train and work and then one day a week you're supposed to go full cheat
day and so i would do what used to be 12 hours but then it became 24 you know
you start to redefine what the day is and i would and that was when costello was
pretty young and we would do it together so i would get pizzas and croissants
and donuts and i would just do the full thing and by the end of the day you
don't want to look at an item of food you're just repulsed by food the only
modification i made was the next day i would fast completely just to avoid the
gastric distress of eating anything and so i would do them on sundays and then
mondays i'd fast all day and then by tuesday i felt pretty good again but sunday
and monday or you just feel like you're sliding down the slope of just blood
sugar disaster terrible idea or a good idea you know at the time i enjoyed it i
love donuts croissants all that kind of stuff what's interesting is after
stopping that whole protocol now i just try and eat well it's really a protocol
now i basically i do a pseudo intermittent fasting i don't i'm not really strict
but i'll start it eating around 11. eat my first meal around 11 i usually train
in the morning i eat my last bite of food somewhere around eight or nine and i'm
not super strict i might have some berries or something late at night three
meals two meals two two two meals and then maybe a little bit of snacking on
some nuts or something in the middle i ever fast 24 hours never done a long fast
except when i was doing the the chickpeas and then um and actually there are a
couple different ways to do cheat days that were fun like if you were in a new
city you could try all the restaurants that you wanted yeah and i think tim and
our mutual friend john romanello did a i think it was like a cheat day marathon
where they did you know marathon's 26.3 miles they went to 26.3 different
locations in new york they put it on a map and i never took it to that extreme
but wait wait yeah over how many days one day that was their choice what just
because they were you know just a little bit of something at each place yeah
exactly i mean there are things that guys do in their 30s that you just
shouldn't do in your 40s i can say that because i'm in my 40s and uh now i just
try and eat well most days and what's interesting is about 12 to 14 months ago i
completely lost all appetite for sweets i don't know what happened i still love
savory food so meat and butter and cheese and i love vegetables too i love fruit
also but lost all appetite so if you put a donut in front of me or ice cream or
something like i just it's it's almost aversive to me and i don't know what
happened i don't know what changed it's probably a scientific explanation sure
it says to do neurons dementia [Laughter] the sugar the uh the desire for that
rush maybe is gone from your uh from your soul so what was the most delicious
thing is the croissant doughnuts what what is there a thing that um there's a
place in uh portland i don't know if it's still open called little teas bakery
and they have croissants that easily rival the croissants in paris people make a
lot of the pastry in paris but it's really the bread in paris that's amazing we
lived there when i was a kid and we did a sabbatical there and you know there
they do the baguette morning bake and afternoon bake and there's nothing like
the bread in paris um or the people you know and but if you're in the if you're
in the pacific northwest you know you can find amazing croissants there what do
you do with the croissant what do you do with the bread butter or is it just i
actually used to i don't eat them anymore i don't have much of an appetite for
them even though they're not a sweet food but um i'm always putting butter on
the croissant butter on the butter croissant no jam i would never i would never
adulterate my croissant i have to actually be honest about this because people
talk about steak and they talk about bread with butter i feel like butter is
cheating i feel like you're disrespecting the fundamental food by adding butter
because butter it's like it's like it's like a elite version of ketchup you're
there we diverge because for me bread is just a vehicle for butter a cracker is
just a vehicle for cheese oh so that's just the cracker and the bread is just
texture it's just that people look at you funny if you if you just eat the
butter straight which occasionally i do i got it but so i put a little piece of
bread underneath it not because i'm low carb strictly low carb but just because
otherwise you get some funny looks um that's like pasta is a vehicle for pasta
sauce it's interesting but like indian non-bread you have uh you have the bread
i i've had a lot of soul searching on which part of indian is brings me so much
joy is it the bread or is it all the sauces that come with the bread well there
we diverge again because for for whatever reason and no disrespect to anyone but
indian food doesn't appeal to me well you're a lucky man because the the number
of calories in that food it sneaks like non-bread i don't know how non-bread is
made but i think it's just soaked in oil and it just very intensely like the
density of calories is very very high for me barbecue i would say is probably
the that's good anytime i'm in austin i start thinking about barbecue i do love
you know i do love me my dad's argentine i mean i love steak i love meat i mean
argentina chorizo sausage is an appetizer before you have steak so it's meat on
top of meat and it's not just you know it's not just the men right you see women
sometimes very petite women eating steaks that are bigger than their their skull
size you know slowly they eat very slowly there and they all eat dessert too
which is interesting and they generally do this sort of one meal per day and do
that kind of reflexively that's how i think about it because i often eat one
meal a day especially when i'm traveling it feels like a cheap meal because it
allows it gives you a bit of more freedom to just lose yourself in the quantity
of the food i did the three day fast and i ate uh chicken breast like literally
chicken breast with nothing else just grilled and it was the most delicious
piece of meat i've ever eaten and that uh and that gives you the problem is when
you fast for three days you really can't pig out you really shouldn't you
because your stomach will shrink in size already your gut microbiome is almost
completely depleted by fasting a lot of people think oh cleanses and fasts are
great for the microbiome they quash your microbiome however when you start
eating again the microbiome comes back better than it was before you're fast for
people who don't know sergey and todd are on the call they're kind of pulling
stuff up they just pulled up phelps with the i forget how many calories he was
eating ten thousand you know what's interesting there's some some cool
physiology around this the reason he needed to eat so much is not that he was
burning that many calories in pure movement it's that when you do exercise in
water even if it's warm water the heat transfer in water is greater so you burn
far more calories and again here i i'm admittedly lifting that from uh knowledge
that was passed on to me by tim ferriss i didn't so but i checked it out and
it's absolutely true so if you exercise in water even if it's not really cold
water your caloric needs go way up which is why you get out of the pool and
you're often really hungry and for fans of the human lab podcast and if you're
not a fan what what what are you doing with your life uh you would probably
chuckle at the fact that uh andrew just cited his sources even on that statement
because you're so good at i don't know how your memory works but um the only
person whose memory is better than joe rogan is yours but my colleagues joke um
you know pubmed sort of scrolls through through my through my mind um also in
science as you know attribution is so baked into what we do and um and i think
that it's interesting because now spending a lot of time on social media
attribution is not as common and um but in academia you learn really early on
that if you give a talk about your data and you cite all these amazing sources
all it does is make you look better right whereas in social media and elsewhere
in the business sector it's almost like citing other people people feel as if
it's going to take away some of the credit all it does is place you in the
company of people that do really nice work so i have tremend and i have genuine
and tremendous respect for tim he's been about 10 years ahead on a huge number
of health related things and other things an extremely kind person very
thoughtful person so it's also just a pleasure to shine light on other people
yeah yeah well i actually to push back i i know there's a culture of if you
write a paper standing on the shoulders of giants is a powerful thing but
there's also a culture of not giving credit to the strongest idea in your paper
and instead say it's kind of or implied that it's original there is a culture of
kind of not celebrating others i think people get most competitive in all walks
of life but especially in science when they're as the closer they get and the
exactly the thing they work on and so there's this dance you know there's a few
researchers in each of the individual little things that you work on if you're
studying a particular kind of ant you know that other asshole that also is
studying that particular ant and then you're not going to often give credit for
the brilliant ideas that that other researcher is doing and i think one of the
things you've discovered and just as part of your nature and which is why it's
it's really great that you've uh have an audience and you inspire others to do
the same you celebrate that other ant study here it's great and you everybody
wins it it raises all boats but that initial instinct to be like uh what is it
in borat like my neighbor my neighbor gets a a toaster i get a bigger toaster
yeah that mindset to you know it's not that i'm not competitive in certain
domains but um yeah i get great pleasure from um sharing things that i find and
um i think that you know at the end of the day you're as strong as your
community and you can build a wonderful community just by pointing out things
that you love like these are all just loves i see a paper i love it only rarely
do i think i wish we had done that i usually think fantastic now i can just
focus on something else because they checked off that box and by the way you
mentioned pubmed and barbecue i i should mention that i got a chance to hang out
with uh rick rubin thanks to you he's a friend of yours and you made the
connection that was a huge gift to my spirit i guess he's a truly truly special
human being and the there's a lot i could say about why he's a special human
being i'd love to learn how you met him but i should also just mention on the
pubmed thing it was so interesting talking to him about music and uh both on the
podcast and privately and just listening to music together because when you
mention a song he does this thing where he like closes his eyes and he finds
that song in the album that we're talking about and he steps through the album
you could see the brain like stepping through individual songs to find that song
in the album and there's that kind of look up process and then he puts himself
mentally in that space of like okay this is uh you know whatever the album is
and not just the ones he produced but all he's in the encyclopedia of of music
and it's so interesting it also uh the thing i really love about this something
like a calmness that radiates from him that's okay to close your eyes and place
yourself in in the in the place where that album was recorded in the feeling of
that album like that that silence let's go there let's go there together let's
look at alice in wonderland and we'll go there together you do a good rick rubin
minus the beard minus the beard his beard is epic right you can't fake a beard
like that you know how'd you guys meet yeah well rick i'm very blessed to
consider a close friend um rick and i got introduced through a common friend
during the pandemic and we started doing some face time together and just
talking about things related to science and health and i'm not a musician i have
no musical ability or talent i have a good ability to memorize lyrics and i love
lyrics and i love poetry so i asked him a lot of questions about musicians that
i happen to love that he's worked with and knows and so he would give me stories
about musicians and i would talk to him about health and then eventually we
formed a friendship where we would talk about any number of different topics in
life and then we started spending time together in person uh when he was in town
or nearby and as you now know uh you know rick in addition to all his incredible
accomplishments has an incredible understanding of how to get the brain and body
into state right and as you pointed out he's willing to do the things that allow
him to help these incredible artists get into the best state to do their craft
and so if he needs to sit there and be quiet with his eyes closed for a minute
or two and or more he'll do that he has routines to allow himself to get into
state and it's really inspired me to think about states of mind as something
that you know we'd all love to just just flip the switch and say we're focused
or we're creative but um to actually ratchet through the the challenging steps
in order to do that and to figure out what one needs to do on a regular basis to
get into a proper state it's not just going to come from a cup of coffee a you
know a lamp of a particular wavelength or something it's going to be those
things but it's also going to be really teaching oneself how to get into proper
state yeah you did an episode on hypnosis do you think it's a kind of self-
hypnosis yes i do um because hypnosis is a con you limit the context you're very
alert and you're very calm and um he has a number of these different practices
and so we would talk about those and then we also have enjoyed a lot of
discussions about deep neuroscience in fact i introduced rick to a friend of
mine who's a neurosurgeon and neuroscientist and they've become friendly you
know rick is one of these people that he sort of defies definition um incredibly
kind incredibly private person too so you know i'm being respectful of that but
um and then of course uh he's a fan of your podcast and so when i learned that i
i it just made natural sense to introduce you and i know he really enjoyed
meeting you and we talk about you a lot and and of course in a positive light
you know i think his dedication to getting into these states of mind and his
willingness to do that has completely transformed my routines around life like
for instance before doing a very long podcast recording the solo ones which
often take me several hours or more six hours to record sometimes more sometimes
less i realize that there's a certain brain state associated with that so i have
to really limit the kind of interactions i have for the two hours before i
actually walk and talk out loud through my neighborhood people think i'm crazy
yeah but i live in a neighborhood where there are a lot of crazy creatives
anyway saying you're not crazy well um at least not uh institutionally defined
as crazy yet but um you know getting into state of mind is something that we'd
all just imagine would flip the switch but rick really convinced me you have to
do the work to do the work can you maybe uh linger on that lucid day a little
bit more your process of how you get in that space that's really interesting as
i i have to admit i do everything last minute before podcast i don't know uh
like there's a lot of anxiety because like whatever if i have to pack if i have
to set up stuff you were luckily a few minutes you showed up a few minutes later
which for an academic is right on right on time but the stress is immense and uh
on top of that you look at like a situation with rick rubin he's out i had to
set up microphones in front of him and just that stress the anxiety he knows a
lot about microphones what'd he say which i really loved he's like how close do
you like the microphone to be it's like that's a very rick rubin kind of thing
right that the details really matter yeah the details really matter right down
to your relationship to the microphone right yeah distance and whether or not it
brings out the timbre in your voice but of course that's what he does he
produces music but he also said like you know he is the professional he said how
close do you like it to be and he said it with the gentleness where i had like
an existential crisis where i don't i don't know i he gave me so much like wow
like he made me feel like an artist like that the microphone uh distance is a
decision you're supposed to make well i have to say and this has actually come
up in some of our conversations about you i mean you are you are an artist and
actually joe rogan once i heard him talking about podcasting and the fact that
he's always trying to get better at it you know and he described podcasting at
one moment as an art right and it is it's a certain medium of communication and
there's a cadence and a rhythm that um when it's working it really can
facilitate the transfer of information when it's not it doesn't i mean obviously
joe just being himself has tapped into that cadence that allows and it's made so
many people excited to hear him talk in his case and in general i think part of
the art is uh refusing the world as you get a bigger audience change who you are
there's one quote that i've seen out there where he says you know i'm like the
talking about himself he says you know i'm like the fish that got through the
net there's no stage version of me right how he is in person is how he is you
know out in the world and of course there's nuance to his life right and his
different relationships of course but it's true i mean we've had the you know
the great fortune of spending time with him out away from the microphones so to
speak joe is joe so can you speak to your that process you mentioned the walking
and the talking to yourself because that's fascinating yeah i try and do a
couple of things um first of all i when i was a kid i had a little bit of a
grunting tick when i was five or six i would feel this buildup of tension in my
throat and i would do this grunting tick if i get very tired i start to do it
still we actually know that this is related to these basal ganglia circuits for
go no go you've got an accelerator and a break basically in your neural
circuitry and um kids with turrets in ocd um the break doesn't work quite as
well and so one thing that happens is if i wake up in the morning and i'm
especially if i'm well rested well if i'm not well rested i do a hypnosis or
yoga nidra in order to recover my sleep that works really well but then once i'm
into the process of preparing the podcast i've already gone through my notes i
know what i want to say more or less in a kind of general contour and then i
take a walk and i i try to so no phone with me and i try to assess whether or
not my energy is too high or too low for podcasting because when you podcast as
you know you have to punch out a lot of material but then there's times when you
really need to slow down and emphasize and articulate and so uh what i do this
is i don't i've never revealed this uh what i do actually is i will recite the
lyrics of songs for about 10 minutes um songs i love while i walk out loud it
calms you and focuses you what does it do i think it gets my vocal cords warmed
up and it also do you sing or speak them i often sing them and unfortunately
nobody hears and as i do this i start to evaluate whether or not i'm straining
to get the words out or whether or not i'm straining to make them slow enough so
that i can articulate them so there are days when i have so much energy that i
i'm trying to speak faster than i should in order to articulate properly there
are other days when i'm tired and i can't sort of keep up with my thoughts and
so what i try and do is assess that and then adjust the transmission the rpm so
to speak for instance i can speak very quickly and then i can slow down so i can
change the cadence of my voice and when you teach in the classroom you learn as
you know because you're an excellent teacher i've watched your lectures in the
classroom as you teach in the classroom when you want to slow down every teacher
knows you turn to the whiteboard or chalkboard and you start writing right it
gives you a break and then you turn around and you fire back the kind of machine
gun fire of of information and then you slow down or you underline something
when you podcast you don't have that opportunity right there are no visuals in
my podcast so what i try and do is always get my voice warmed up and make sure
that i'm thinking and speaking at approximately the same rate and then i also do
this thing of i put my vision into panoramic vision when i walk which is very
calming and then i actually start to remind myself of the purpose of podcasting
this sounds very mission statement e but you asked what i do i i remind myself
first and foremost that what i want to communicate what i want to come through
is the beauty and utility of biology and i only feel comfortable saying the word
beauty publicly now about science things thanks to you because uh i i think love
and beauty yeah life love and beauty dr andrew humerman love and beauty um but
also darkness and hatred and uh if you're talking about the lex friedman podcast
you have to adjust you have to address the shadow also the shadow side but i
think about the i want to communicate the the beauty and utility of biology and
then i i check my my emotional state i want to make sure that i'm not angry
about anything and certainly if i am that i'm going to set it aside for the
podcast because that's not a place for for my whatever i might be dealing with i
also really start to feel into the parts of the research and the papers i found
that i really love because that's the part of me that i i like the most frankly
um and on the podcast if there's a paper like for instance we have a paper
excuse me a podcast coming out soon about um heat as a tool you know sauna but
some other things and in researching this i learned so much about these heat
shock proteins and the use of sauna in finland for increasing growth hormone but
also for the treatment of mental illness and i realized i i fell in love with
this literature it's just a beautiful literature these people are true pioneers
for doing this work now everyone's into sauna but this was 20 years ago the way
the experiments were done were amazing with all these finnish people with
thermocouples up there rectum to measure temperature swimming in pools it's
hilarious and great and so i start to think about i think you know i just start
to really access my love of the work and then when we finally sit down meaning
my producer rob and i and record i just sort of want to just bask in in sharing
it just like the little version of me when i was six or seven i used to spend
all weekend reading the encyclopedia guinness book of world records making my
mother drive me places to introduce me to i had this obsession with trapping
animals when i was a kid meet these people and then on monday i would insist on
giving a lecture in class which is a little kid so that's basically what it is i
just try and access that that child-like energy and so i want to be clear the
goal is always to make the information interesting clear and actionable and if
it's also surprising then then that's a bonus but that's basically the process
but yeah i'm i'm singing and talking and and getting into state and i used to
feel very sheepish about sharing any of this it's the first time i've ever
shared it out loud but but rick was the one who encouraged me to find a process
that works and continue to develop that process and not let anything get near
that process people in my personal life know this and when it's time it's like i
don't care what else is going on on i'm i'm moving into that brain state and
there's probably a process like that for anything that you do in life that you
take seriously so the people that have perfected this is athletes like if
olympic level athletes they have to have a process like this you know i think
tiger woods actually was taught self-hypnosis quite young um and used self-
hypnosis often during his tournaments sometimes to great uh success and other
times less so is there other places in life that you use kind of a protocol like
a mental protocol to get ready many of the best areas of life are their own form
of hypnosis right um you know that you're in hypnosis if for instance you're in
a movie and something happens and you feel the emotional lift without being
self-conscious about it um yes i think that um one thing that we've tried to do
in our house is around meal times to try and set a state that food isn't just
something that we just throw down our throats and i'm fortunate that you know my
partner cooks really well and so i try and give her the space to do that and
that's a whole thing of her getting into state and then for the cooking the
cooking preparation i can just see it i just see the way she approaches the
whole thing and the the pleasure in serving it and and i'm an eater not a cooker
um but both are important roles you could be a very good eater like there's
something about is there anything better in this world than that feeling
especially if it's a family getting around a table just the warmth of that i
don't know the it's like uh the cold outside of the the cruel world cannot touch
you in this place that you've returned to and if uh i mean did you grow up
eating meals as a family yeah yeah i mean sitting down no television no well i
didn't really have television period outside of meals so most of my time was
spent um you know like a stray cat outdoors just running around playing soccer
imagine you in this like dirt or concrete lot between two very high-rise
buildings playing soccer yeah in uh in like athletic gear that you only see in
eastern europe you know how like you come to the states and people wear their
athletic gear you go to europe and you see maybe it's the soccer culture yeah
but you see athletic gear that you just don't see anywhere else that's
interesting i mean i we grew up pretty poor so first of all i was always wearing
my brother's who's an older brother brother's clothes uh and they were like old
uh like my favorite things were american things that i didn't understand it
would be like a pepsi shirt or something and it was just that was the gear and
it was like too large for me but i thought i was the coolest person ever just
wearing this fancy like kanye like type of fashion yeah there's something about
i feel like in in eastern europe they wear athletic gear where like the guys
like zip up yeah no that's like fancy stuff that's like those are the cool kids
i see like the cool soccer players uh football players that uh like they were in
a league of some kind so they would get uniforms or like or they somehow i
always thought anyone who had anything nice had to do something really bad to
get it that was my way that's the view of the world because like um like i guess
i didn't understand how it's it's possible to be rich because most of us were
surrounded by people who were poor and that life was beautiful and simple and
it's like why do you escape that life but you still admire the the cool like uh
when we got mcdonald's it was like what kind of world does this place come from
like who invented this this it's a fascinating view from a child's perspective
of like of capitalism essentially yeah but the fact you ate dinner together is
really interesting my parents divorced when i was an adolescent so then there
was a total fracture of any family structure but prior to that we ate dinner
together every night i was expected to know how to use my knife and fork and you
know it's like a very structured thing i don't know if kids do that now you know
if i ever have kids they're going to do that and certainly actually on the way
over here i was thinking i was like you know uh i really want a lot of kids i
want like a whole litter and um i was thinking if lex has kids and i have kids
then like then we can we can like pit them against each other with jiu jitsu
this is my chance at redemption uh the long game right they'll all want to be
engineers or physicists yeah um they won't want to be biologists um but but in
all seriousness i i look forward to the day that our our kids uh play together
yeah yeah i think there's something so the family dinner the ritual of the
family dinner like but also the special occasion dinners like uh where there's a
little bit more preparation a little bit more cooking whether it's on the
weekend or for some holiday in russia it was a thing that actually i find
completely missing for the most part in america is there was neighbors there was
a you broke the walls between families much more commonly like there would be
kind of regular characters like a sitcom almost you know if you watch the sitcom
it's never just the family there's always like other characters there's bursting
in the door bursting in the door let's start doing that here just to make you
feel at home just start showing you that i know where you live i think people
want to respect uh like uh you know michael mouse lives next door to me and i
think people want to respect each other's privacy or something like that and i
think we all get super busy and you know like it's kind of work to do this uh
dinner together or you know you know if you see it as a thing that needs to be
scheduled it's work we get busy there's a lot of stuff going on but if it's part
of a ritual a part of the culture that they'll all all of those walls get broken
down and then you realize like that's like later looking back those are the
things you miss it's like that's what that's what life is about like all the
stupid stuff you're doing in terms of career whatever all the busy things those
don't matter what matters it's the people and yeah in academia you know this
changed in the last few years of course um but one of the great joys was
professors will stop by your office or your lab nobody set up an appointment
there's a guy when i was a professor in san diego a guy named harvey kearney's
member of the national academy is the the truly the world's expert in the
evolution of vision and evolution of brains generally and he would show up in my
lab and he would just start talking to the students in postdocs and um i mean in
a pure encyclopedia uh and then you'd at some point you'd say hey harvey i gotta
go and you kick him out right or this guy he's a physicist david kline david
kleinfeld who's uh same way actually david kleinfeld's interesting one he a
student of his went to on to create the beavis and butthead cartoon and one of
them is david he's a physics professor now people can look him up and david's
one of those guys who just walk into your office he just sit down and just start
talking to you he's and and so there's a kind of a family feel it's like cheers
or seinfeld or one of those shows where somebody just walks in and uh yeah i
think you and i both share a love of the community around things and podcasting
is a little bit more isolated i should say for the guest episodes the
preparation is completely different because it's more conversational and so
there i don't do any of this business of putting myself into state i just try
and make sure that the guest is taken care of and i do list out the questions
i'm going to ask before but those i actually really like the interview episodes
far more than i like this doing the solo ones just psychologically i mean i just
like learning from someone directly yeah because you asking an expert about
something like sitting here with you when we recorded the podcast where you were
guest on the huberman lab podcast and for the first time and finally someone was
explaining to me the difference between machine learning artificial intelligence
and all these other things you know and i'm i've finally forgiven you for making
me cry about costello on camera uh but because it helped me move through it but
yeah but in all seriousness the interview ones are are a sheer pleasure the solo
ones i really enjoy but their their work sometimes i think like i'm gonna sweat
a little blood prepping for them well it's interesting because i do think
prepping for interviews is having a similar process might be also very valuable
like i have to i have to think about that because um i think when you do a
conversation for several hours especially when it's a high-stakes one so it's
not like what you and i know it's more like it's just chatting and so world
order isn't going to shift according to it although you never know we can
different knowing you will probably be into some pretty controversial topics in
a few minutes you like to ride the edge more though there are a number of topics
that i just completely avoid and my response to those is always that i have a
lot of opinions about that but not a lot to say you know but whereas you you've
become far uh braver in terms of the topics you'll encounter and some of your
guests have been a bit controversial right some of them are are people that not
a lot of people that a lot of people don't like um and you've been willing to
just sit down and maybe it's the jujitsu thing you know i don't know i it is
tricky one of my goals for this year was to talk to people that a lot of people
really don't like are you going to share with us and here i am but peop people
that are in prison right major political leaders i've been thinking a lot about
how to talk to really difficult controversial figures but find together
something with them that's deeply honest about their nature about the ideas they
have about the world like reveal something real and some people you have to be
very careful some people are very good at hiding the reel inside them even from
themselves that's something i think about a lot i think about dictators of the
past and i put myself in the mindset well how do you reveal something real about
this person to themselves i think that to me and you kind of spoke to that but
uh a great conversation is one one where both of you discover something new like
uh it's not just so i love that too that's my favorite thing what you mentioned
which is allowing your curiosity ask all kinds of questions and get excited and
to learn from an expert but also to push them to discover something about
themselves about their ideas together and then that discovery and sometimes it's
uh like we don't see it in the moment but the audience hears it it's weird to
say like i would compare it to when you're a musician you're playing with other
musicians you lose yourself in the moment yeah it's all it's like it's working
right it's working but you don't really uh see the big picture impact of what
it's working right actually feels like and that's where the audience uh can
could see that like if you talk to somebody evil uh you know for me as an
interviewer i have to empathize with that person if i want to understand i have
to put myself in that mind space and to put yourself in that mindset you really
have to become that you have to pl you have to understand the evil inside of you
like you have you can't just think if somebody's in power and has used that
power to abuse others you can't just be a i personally a person who seeks to
understand you can't just be a journalist asking generic questions you have to
put yourself in a place where you're somebody who's given a lot of power and
slowly you start to abuse that power and what does that person become who are
you i have to plug myself into those moments in my life in the past where i've
been angry at something uh and where i've been cruel because i was angry in
little ways but then you magnify them at scale and i have to have to go there
and that's very human and then i have to look at another person from across the
table for me and understand well you're there too and then you had more
opportunity to do truly cruel things and and then um and then where like i have
to plug myself into places where i've been i can imagine i can go where i was
cruel to others and was unaware of it so i was in my space where i was thinking
that i'm doing good and i was doing not good again i've never got an opportunity
to do any of those things at a large scale but all of us have done it at a small
scale sure and i plug myself into that and then we're we're here or two if it's
somebody who's in prison if it's somebody who's a dictator we're in that space
where evil is is all of us have the capacity to do that evil and i have to
imagine myself being able to do that evil and then we're here together in that
dark dark place and then if if it's just right something real can actually come
something from that person's childhood i may be awakening to uh realization that
i thought it was a good person and i'm not and for that only happens when you
truly empathize those moments of discovery are beautiful but they also happen in
science when you just have a conversation and you realize uh i feel like talking
to stephen wolfram i feel like we constantly realize beautiful things together
on this element of um you know evil and sociopathy that you know jung had this
notion that we have all things inside us and that we all have the capacity to be
good or evil etc um but i have a good fortune of working with somebody who has
deep understanding of psychiatry but also psychoanalysis and jungian theory and
um and he said to me recently he said you know whether or not all people have
all things inside them is still debated in the psychology community and in the
neuroscience community and as a matter of philosophy but there are certain
people not many but there are certain people for whom they've actually lived out
many versions of their possible selves in the first person and so those are
unique individuals then even if they tapped into these things that as you
mentioned as a at a more minor level as opposed to impacting people negatively
at a at scale so being able to access those different parts of oneself is key
and you've been willing to step into that you know my podcast is not one in
which we we get down to those matters yes you never know we might do an episode
on on narcissism and sociopathy the other thing that i took away from a
conversation with a friend who was a did a lot of years in special operations in
the intelligence community he said you know it's if you look at somebody's past
at some point you will come to understand some pretty good reasons as to why
they became who they are but you have to draw the his words the red line
someplace and what he was referring to was the fact that certain people at least
in the eyes of certain communities deserve to be eliminated as a consequence of
their actions right regardless of what drove them to those actions so it gets
right down to the line between psycho nature nurture uh neuroscience and the law
and justice complicated complicated themes i i can think of a number of people
that um i would love to hear you interview and here i'm not revealing the
reasons why but except for the fact that i think you would be uniquely suited to
bring out the important components of the conversation that other people have
not been able to uh do which uh for instance liz holmes this is one of the most
um mysterious and yet disliked people on the planet um uh she's sort of
synonymous with deception um i don't know if there have been any real interviews
of her since the whole thing um i haven't followed that case i listened to the
book and i um i followed it a little bit because it was happening in my hometown
right theranos was right up the road the building's still there it's interesting
it's it's some of the most premier real estate in silicon valley but nobody
wants it it's sort of like it's very hard to sell a home where somebody
committed suicide or committed a murder even if it's a beautiful home so i feel
like the theranos building is that building um so that would be a really
interesting interview i would love to hear that interview one of the most
interesting dark human beings in science yeah and then there will even be people
that say you know um was it even science right it might have all been deception
it might have been one part deception one part goal setting mixed in with
clearly that there were so many factors impacting what happened um i think the
big difference between theranos and that story and some of the other stories
about silicon valley where people promised a lot more than they could deliver is
they were promising things that were directly related to health and health care
people were taking blood tests with the understanding that the data they were
getting was important information about sexually transmitted diseases and other
diseases and making real world decisions on the basis of that whereas if you
remember when the iphone first came out and steve jobs was still alive and the
phones were dropping calls if you held it in a particular way and his response
was a little flip he said hey folks it's a phone as if like don't get so worked
up but people held them understandably to a very high standard you know she
would sort of it seemed and i don't know because i certainly wasn't there seemed
like she sort of adopted this idea that you could get it wrong a bunch of times
before you get it right except if the allegations are true and i think they she
was found guilty i believe on a number of accounts that a number of the things
that they were doing were were impacting real world decision making so steve's
point about the phone it's just a phone well it depends on the call if you're
calling 9-1-1 then it's not just a phone right um but in the case of blood tests
and disease you know that's that's serious i think that the theranos case was
super interesting to me because of the number of people from major universities
and from government that both trusted her and the number of people who did not
trust her and yet either didn't speak up or know and listen to them it was only
in the forensic version of it that everyone said oh yeah i knew that she was
lying et cetera et cetera they were lying there are multiple people involved in
those lies apparently but i have a deep interest in the neuroscience of of
narcissism sociopathy and some of the darker aspects of the mind so yeah maybe
someday maybe we'll do a podcast together yeah can be like in the in the in the
kind of early 90s version of talk shows where we darken the lights and we yeah
we do it together you can use your voice because your voice is much more
sinister sounding than mine good cop back up uh well it'd be interesting from a
scientific perspective of somebody who is a sociopath or psychopath how to
reveal something real about them i think that requires not just well i don't
know what that requires that requires the same skill that it takes to be a good
uh therapist right and some therapists won't work with sociopaths because um
they don't feel any progress can be made some therapists will work with
sociopaths because for the wealthy ones they often um they want their money i i
think most therapists are good and benevolent but there's some that will do it
just same way lawyers will work with criminals knowing they're criminals right
um oftentimes because they're criminals there are certain domains of psychiatry
that are more tractable than others right borderlines are interesting i should
just mention because they have this phenomenon of splitting so in the in the
world of psychology the idea is that being neurotic is actually the goal the
idea that you could be um you know feel something and then work a lot to
overcome it or um have some sort of defense mechanism in place but that's not
destructive that's actually a pretty healthy state to be in it's uh provided
it's not destructive psychotic is truly delusional thinking about reality and
the idea is that borderline split intermittently split between psychotic and
neurotic that's why it's called this beautiful work by melanie klein that
describes this which i'm just now kind of delving into but you know so the
borderline is the person who is like i love you i love you i love you and then
truly feels as if they hate you and you become the bad object um borderlines are
challenging for psychologists because of the splitting right schizophrenics are
challenging because of the the detachment from reality and narcissists are
challenging because they're often so charming that even the therapists are
charmed i believe you mentioned carl deisseroth uh we'll we'll talk he's
definitely not a narcissist he's one of the more humble people but he is
brilliant thanks again to you you've connected us uh i had the pleasure of
having a conversation with him you had a conversation with him i really enjoyed
it on the podcast you guys come from the same science from the same place uh
maybe different journeys fascinating and levels we were postdocs together carl
is truly the michael jordan the wayne gretzky five children amazing marriage to
also an amazing scientist his wife michelle monges in our neurology department
at stanford in incredible thinker writer very kind person humble speaking of
getting into state sorry carl i'm going to out you on this but um carl despite
being at the highest levels of science and engineering and a practicing
psychiatrist his office is literally a coat closet with a small table lamp when
you meet with carl if you manage to meet with him because he's very hard to get
to you walk in you sit down as if you're going through some interrogation and
some spy novel and he'll ask you what are you most excited about lately and i've
got 11 minutes or something and that's a meeting with carl yeah because he's
that busy but he doesn't have the office with the pictures of the kids and the
thing and all that all that is kept elsewhere so in order to get i asked him why
do you work in this office right you work on light and channels of light things
related to light of all things here you are in this dark room and he said well
this is what gets me into the state of mind to be able to do what i want to do
very rick rubin ish in not at all the same person but very similar in that he's
figured out the physical space he needs in order to get into the optimal state
to do the work they need to do in this lifetime and it's very unusual right if i
don't have a window i kind of freak out i can do it here for a while we're in
this black cube here floating in space of course but but i find that amazing
that these that these people that are operating at this super high level are
willing to actually deprive themselves of a lot of conditions they're not
sitting there with us with the secretary coming in offering them espresso every
five minutes and things that no no no that's new york neuroscience i'm picking
the new york neuroscience mafia is kind of famous for having all the you know
tickets to the opera and this and that and they they enjoy lifestyle a lot the
new york new york side oh there is one there definitely is one they know who
they are uh they know who they are people don't know uh andrew huberman is from
the west coast and now he's just starting wars with the neuroscience mafia they
do amazing science they think they they love their lifestyle and that's
wonderful but the culture is very different yeah um carl and i think silicon
valley in general kind of prides itself on this kind of um monk-like that says
system right so but at the individual scale be deliberate about controlling the
environment i think about that with the conversations too i haven't been
deliberate about that either in terms of controlling the space you're in
visually yes black curtains all those kinds of things there is nothing like the
lex friedman podcast studio first first of all when you when you do them
remotely i always feel like i'm in a witness relocation program you only get the
coordinates at the last moment yeah and you always get the sense that there are
people behind the walls that um you know are recording things well there's
something about creating a feeling i have a sense that there's a robot over
there there's there's severals throughout this place and i i think i think part
of that part of creating a feeling would be having the robots constantly moving
around and having a mind of their own because that would most closely put guests
and other humans they interact with into a place that's um closest to my mind
because of such an engineering mind and and one where when things come to life
it's a beautiful place to be and whatever that is that could be like art but to
me robots are art and so i'm thinking about that both for me and for guests and
i'm also thinking about the difficult guess just to return to you said elizabeth
holmes one person maybe a couple of things i want to say so one person i think i
would like to talk to is galen maxwell i always get afraid right before you
reveal these kinds of things and now i know why i get afraid yeah i mean again
assuming that she did the things that people claim she did they're despicable
right i mean these were underage children right there's just no version of the
story where she did the things she was accused of doing and is still a quote-
unquote good person there's just in my mind right um and yet i think there is
tremendous interest in understanding like what led her to do all that so at
least for some people let me say a couple of things so one is at a high level
let me say that she believes or her current story is is that she's the victim of
who or jeffrey epstein oh my i think i'll just leave that there as is so this is
these are ideas that you're facing the nature of truth and the nature of the
human mind is what it is and this is imagine folks if you went into a room with
the person that says that what do you do next let me also say that i never or
rarely let me say not to say never i rarely mention names that i'm interested in
talking to without having made significant progress in already securing that
interview so people sometimes ask me about vladimir zelensky and vladimir putin
i do not bring them up lightly in terms of their in terms of there being a path
to an actual conversation that said something i regret but i'm not sure i know
how what to do with it but in the case of all the people i just mentioned i
haven't been preparing for those conversations i only start really preparing
seriously when it's confirmed because it's such a heavy burden and one of the
things i regret in having mentioned a conversation with vladimir putin before
the war in ukraine broke out in the past few years is that i would mention it
very loosely very casually and without having really deeply put myself into a
place that i'm ready to talk to him and that that's a tricky thing because then
the internet uh the the audience in general and just me when i listen back to my
dumb self think well why are you speaking so lightly about these topics well i
know you've had a long-standing interest in talking to him i think now you know
uh well i don't understand um how i would sit down and have a conversation with
somebody like that but that's not in in the range of my skill sets right i or
like uh maybe not in the range of things that you're drawn to somehow not so
much i mean i would watch that episode with with great interest um well you did
an episode recently with this guy who was a former cyber criminal turned
stateside right i think he works for the government now and there was a segment
in there um remind me his name brad johnson right johnson there was a segment in
there where he talked about stealing a lifetime's worth of collected coins from
some elderly woman and this was everything she had and then he openly admitted
that he felt no remorse which is the way he described is purely sociopathic and
then of course we learned that he grew up in a family where criminal behavior
was very common it was kind of embedded into his um notions of what typical
behaviors were and i found myself somewhat conflicted but also hung up you know
hung up on this idea that you know i mean he was you know he had behaved as a
sociopath um or in a sociopathic way and it created a an internal conflict
because he's quite charming guest and his stories are terrific um especially i
really enjoyed his discussions about how he would go out and um do all these
things out of a desire to please his his girlfriend you know so he was in
service to other people despite being a sociopath he could say he was in service
to them as a way to extract it gets very complicated i think is the reason i
went into science is that it at some level it's more about facts than it is
opinions and judgments and i don't know that i have the ability to suspend
judgment over the away from the kind of top level contours of my initial
reaction to like if it's true like the glenn maxwell's and the liz holmes and
the other sociopaths is one of just kind of revulsion and repulsion but that
could also reflect the fact that i'm not as you know uh neurologically
sophisticated as somebody that can spin all the plates of of empathy forget
forgiveness but also um holding people accountable the same time that's that's
work that takes if you think about that's three forebrain circuits having to
work in parallel that's the difference between chess or a game of go and a game
of checkers i guess i'm playing checkers playing chess no so one is actually
holding in your mind and two is the the raw skill of conversation you're you're
very just having listened to your interviews a very good conversation but the
skill of conversation is really tricky i'm not being self-deprecating i'm being
just objective i'm not good at conversation i'm working very hard getting better
at it i'm i'm speaking not about just podcasting i'm speaking just normal life i
i'm i have anxiety from social interaction i are you really a huge amount yeah
so this is interesting because i never detect that in you ever and i think uh
there are people that we both know that have said to me that they too feel
anxious and yet your voice is steady i don't see any perspiration oh yeah um you
appear i was scared shitless with rick rubin rick rubin is at when you first
meet him is intimidatingly calm but as you get to know him a bit you realize
that his the kindness and the generosity that you sense is real um but yeah i
would never in a million years uh have guessed that you get anxious in
conversation can i just make another quick comment this may come off
entertaining to you andrew maybe you've already gotten the same um but having
mentioned vladimir putin vladimir zelonski uh gelain maxwell there's a natural
question how does lex have access to these people who does he work for like how
does he who works for him for who works for him right what does he have on
others this i'm actually i asked my i when i look in the mirror uh just somebody
who kind of enjoys conspiracy theories and i want to ask the same question like
well i usually ask in the following way like how the fuck am i so lucky like who
am i being am i a robot being controlled by somebody else or like wha how is
this how is this my life right now what is happening it really does feel like a
simulation so let me just speak to several things first of all i have no boss i
know i know of nor am i controlled by any intelligence agencies of any nation
we're going to get you a dog lex that i could talk to i'm scared of getting a
dog because i would fall in love so deeply i think that uh next time i'm
bringing a puppy i'm just gonna bring a puppy i'm gonna leave it here man and
then uh you'll never see me again i mean i love dogs so much but the uh i was
also surprised and maybe um i i have never talked to an intelligence agency
which is very interesting to me like i i i that you're aware of because they're
very good at communicating right but i've been very suspicious on this exact
point that's the downside of kind of being an introvert having anxiety about
social interaction but then having so much love thrown your way because connect
over podcast podcasts have a powerful way of connecting people so people come
with you with love yeah that i really love that i appreciate but i wonder like
exactly this question like uh like why is this person with a russian accent
talking to me and show showing me so much love well because it's sorry to
interrupt you again but um it's what we do um and it's a sign of interest by the
way to sometimes sometimes yeah i have a colleague at stanford and she said you
know interruption 75 of this time is a sign of real interest in what the person
is saying if nothing else uh well you're very lovable well that that but i mean
i learned about uh hedgehog and the fog from you yeah you know when i learned
you know you're very lovable people love you because you're lovable i love love
okay so 100 and it's i mean especially here in austin texas people are so so
amazing i go just hugs and just i i love people but do you want a family are you
eventually 100 no i mean you're i i take what you said as a challenge uh in
terms of having a family with kids and they do jiu jitsu and obviously defeat
you and and make you um miserable for your failures as a father because you
couldn't uh but you're gonna be a great dad build up an army of good judiciary
people but yes i would love a family i would love to have uh children but i just
want to finish that point because i'm nervous about it i'm nervous about the way
people perceive what you're seeing is a forrest gump type character like who i
am i seem to be and this is how like the world seems to work is you just try you
try to be yourself like you try to find yourself that's maybe the better way to
say it and just be that be kind to people work your ass off and say f you to
anybody that wants to control you or to tell you what to do just be free and
then put love out there in the world and doors open this karma thing seems to
work uh some like how the hell did how the hell am i friends with you now how
the hell did i get a chance to eat barbecue with rick rubin right like you guys
had a barbecue he had barbecue uh he uh right of course he's he's from new york
any new yorker that i know has very high standards for food because bad
restaurants don't last long in new york and barbecue count says oh yeah oh yeah
texas barbecue well you know i would also add that you whether or not you
realize or not you took tremendous risk i mean we come from the same original
community which is academic science right and to be at mit and to start posting
lectures online is risky right to you know i was third or fourth man in on in
terms of podcasting as an academic because you had gone on rogan many times
david sinclair gone on there you know the especially before the the pandemic you
just didn't see many academics and scientists talking in a public-facing way so
you took tremendous risk right you took tremendous risk always wearing that
jacket and tie right um the only time i haven't seen you in that truly is when
we rolled jiu jitsu which is and i hear i'm being generous to myself saying i
rolled you just basically you choked me out in front of me that was really
really it was uh it was a great it was great fun and i i i thank you for doing
that to have a beginner's mind is a beautiful thing i have admittedly i have not
been taking the classes but i'm going to i truly am um especially there's a
small chance i might find myself in austin a bit more often in the in the near
future but the well if you're out in san francisco you train with mark
zuckerberg he just started so oh yeah you guys get interesting sure i mean he's
actually uh i mean people listen to an episode perhaps he's a fascinating human
being listen to it that's great you took tremendous risk as an academic to do
what you did so i do believe that when one takes intelligent risk because you
can die you can crash your career you can do all sorts of self-destructive or uh
destructive things when taking risks you took risks and and they paid off right
and you take different risks at different stages but i i don't throw around the
word admiration lightly i mean i admire that you were in this classroom at mit
like i'm gonna film this and put it online uh you one of your early interviews
is with ido portal who's very hard to get to i've communicated with edo a few
times you should definitely talk to him i can't wait to talk to him i'm dying to
talk to him i was supposed to do some um course teaching with him uh right
before the pandemic head and then it got canceled because he couldn't travel but
getting to him is exceedingly challenging so you do have this incredible ability
to get to people um and for them to trust you and know you and i think it's
through your authenticity and i think it's the fact that you're willing to go
places where people haven't been before you know that this is what what's the
saying about pioneers how do you spot the pioneers they're the people with the
arrows in their backs you know so that that's the you know yeah and and that's
actually a quote that i lifted from terry signowski who's a uh there you go you
know sources again um terry's uh you should talk to terry he's a um uh
computational neuroscientist down at the salk institute uh howard hughes
investigator etc but so you know taking risks that other people have not taken
is that's a real thing and to do it with uh integrity and rigor that's a real
thing and so yeah i'm complimenting you and i hope it i hope it lands and lands
deeply but i also hope that people will hear that and understand that it's one
thing to to do what other people are already doing boldly it's a whole other
thing to launch an entire art form or venue and you did that and you didn't
write a book hopefully you will someday but you didn't go write a book a lot of
academics have written books you went online jordan peterson another
controversial character he did it too all those lectures that he filmed and then
it's led to this other thing so um you know there's karma and then there's also
having the spine to just put it all on the line and do something for which there
is no prior example to hold on to while you go through those headwinds the
really fascinating thing actually a lot of people tell me about you andrew
huberman like the reach of a podcast is really fascinating it's not the it's not
the numbers of people listen i don't know if that's important at all is what's
important is like the depth of connection you have with certain people it really
moves them like a great and like they really get you so there's a lot of big
andrew huberman fans that really get you it's not just the science it's the
stuff between the lines it's costello it's the whole picture of a scientist that
finds beauty and biology and reveals it and they love you for it you know um
because it was on television at the time i followed that amanda knox story
pretty carefully um and i don't watch television but whenever i would travel if
there was a tv in the airplane i would find myself um getting wrapped into
things like locked up abroad you know like and these things where would you make
you terrified to travel anywhere let alone commit a crime overseas um you know
the the scenes of some of these prisons are so dramatic and you know i mean her
case got a ton of interest and then i you know she went and then was a student
at the university of washington um and has talked quite openly about you know
how she was treated and how people assumed guilt and you know and eventually you
know she was exonerated and you know we can only go by what we know what the law
determined but you know these are people that the world is fascinated by i would
i'm guessing about a third of people have already decided this person is
despicable why would you ever give them an audience about a third of people i
think are open to or at least interested in learning more about them and then i
think the remaining third kind of the third that the category that i put myself
in which is what can i learn about people and myself even in my revulsion right
what can i learn yeah what can i learn about myself from listening to this
conversation with somebody that i that i like to think i'm not talking about
amanda here i'm talking about the other people you're talking about that i i
don't i can't relate to right talk hearing conversations with and about people
that you cannot relate to is informative otherwise your whole mind literally
becomes insular right well there's an interesting thing i also had to um ever
since the war in ukraine broke up one of the questions i was asking myself and
this is not to be dramatic it's just a very simple honest question that i think
a lot of journalists that operate in the war zone or documenting filmmakers that
have recently got a chance to meet have to be honest with themselves are you
willing to put at risk your life for things you do what are you willing to die
for yeah what are you willing to die for it sounds very dramatic but whenever
risk goes up i mean i don't know you you ask that if you want to take out a trip
out to space on a commercial space flight you have to are you willing are you
willing to die for this for this journey now the odds that are really small i
just watched apollo 13 again yeah great movie yeah great i'm not going to space
i'm not going to space afraid of heights no i'm not afraid of heights i'm i just
it feels like a feels like a terrible place to die yeah well first of all death
anywhere is not great yeah although you know i have um a song teed up in my
phone if my if the plane starts to go down yeah i'm going to spend the last few
it's a rare song nobody knows it's a song off a b track of my favorite band
which is rancid this one called the sentence and nobody nobody and i love it and
i listen to it almost every day um right after this the sentence it's called the
the band is called rancid the famous band yeah relatively i love those guys love
their music um and the song is the sentence you can only find it on like a
b-sider outtake and it's if you don't know how to decipher tim armstrong's voice
then you probably won't understand the lyrics but um because it's sung very very
fast but if the plane ever goes anytime there's turbulence i put that thing and
i put the headphones in i'm like well you know if it's time it's time i'm going
to go out like this i don't want to drift off into the galaxy just slowly
asphyxiating and freezing to death that sounds horrible just like i wouldn't
want to drown but on a plane is okay well on a plane i mean like if the thing
starts going down and there's truly nothing you can do you might as well at
least listen to your favorite song yeah true true i'll probably go with the
pixies where's my mind like from fight club and just the calmness just sit back
like uh the musicians playing at the titanic i didn't know you were a pixies fan
i'm gonna have to not not know so much a pixies fan actually i i should say that
i just that was the where's my mind it was the chosen song for fight club at the
end when the buildings are coming down or something like that so that that
there's certain songs that just fit just right for the collapse of human
civilization and you you're calmly appreciating like that that's just it this is
how absurd this life is at any moment it can end and this is it this is uh i
love how we both have uh death and demise yeah um soundtracks it's just a
question when you're an academic doesn't come up often right that's all that's
that's yeah there are some academics that are bold and brave it's it's not a
phenotype being bold and brave in the physical world is not a common phenotype
of academics i mean the great neurologists one of my i don't have any heroes but
oliver sacks is a true hero i mean um people think of him as a writer but he was
foremost a neurologist and he took tremendous pushback from the neurology
community for doing his books and his articles he has a great biography called
on the move there's a wonderful documentary that just came out about him he died
in 2015. i'm actually um kind of a collector of his things um but he tremendous
but he was accused of horrible things until the movie awakenings came out with
de niro and robin williams amazing movie by the way people don't yeah they seem
to not say great things about the movie i love them it was amazing and it was
only once he became famous from that movie that his act more academic work
started to receive any kind of attention and he was invited back to colombia and
nyu yeah the new york neuroscience mafia is a real thing um and yes you know who
you are and some of them are actually coming on the broadcast um they they they
are you know uh i think we talked offline about this we should start a mafia to
bat to fight off whatever is going on in the east coast although i'm still in
rmit so i don't know how that works but well it's different than new york yeah
so i have tremendous respect for science done in new york don't get me wrong
they are excellent scientists it's it's just a very different culture than on
the west coast um and the personalities the the personality tremendous respect
for the mob well and the personalities are are a bit more um grandiose however
because of some of the shift in science culture in the last few years things
around scandals and things of that sort they've been forced to tamp down some of
their personality or at least their outspoken personality and i actually think
it's revealed something really important and useful in science which is you know
it used to be the case you could really inject your personality into what you do
you know richard feynman's a good example if he did today what he did then bongo
drumming on the roof of caltech naked um working out theorems in um strip clubs
and things that he would have lost his job in moments right so that kind of
behavior isn't celebrated anymore it's actually punished um and i'm only half
kidding about this new york neuroscience mafia but because i now exist in
multiple realms i can say these sorts of things and i again admiration and
respect but i will say that i think it's important that people in science or
their and kids that are curious about science understand that you can have any
personality provided that you're ethical and respectful in science and do well
right they're true bench scientists that just want to be at the bench there are
people that just want to be in their office they're people that um really enjoy
public speaking and there are people that love meetings there are people that
hate crowds and so there's a place for everybody truly a place for everybody in
science i would like to be able to shine light on the fact that there are you
can have a shy personality an outgoing personality and you can all of those can
be have excellent careers in science but you have to find the community in place
that's right for you one reason i like stanford is that stanford is very much
about the future we have nobel prize winners we have field medal winners and all
that stuff and their names are on walls and we acknowledge their great works but
most of what you hear about in the halls of stanford is about what's happening
now and what could happen next it's really about the future whereas when i've
spent time at other institutions not to be named you hear that but there's a lot
of kind of recycling and regurgitation of how wonderful people are based on
things they did previously and the students at stanford because of silicon
valley sure they have respect for nobel prizes they're delighted to be learning
from and surrounded by all these great minds but they're mostly interested in
what they're going to create and so i kind of uh not kind of i really like the
shift toward possibility as opposed to things that are steeped in tradition you
know i've never been to high table dinner at oxford i'm sure it's a wonderful
experience i'm also not sure what purpose it serves for the world but i've never
been and so i don't know what the conversations are and so maybe i'm you know
speaking out of line here and then now i'm definitely not getting invited now
you're you're definitely getting invited but yeah i'm with you the the cultures
pic pick the right ones for you that's why i like mit this the spirit of it to
me it's not about the past or the future it's about just tinkering and having
fun building cool stuff like the big ambitious projects it's there i mean maybe
more on the biology and the health side but like the engineering side it doesn't
matter if this has any impact let us build the coolest thing the world has ever
built well there uh whenever i'm in kendall square i've seen uh the they have
those buildings there that actually tilt toward the ground these are these uh
the architecture of mit is also really impressive yeah this uh he pulled up uh
sergey just pulled up yama's tweet i'm inspired by curiosity that is what drives
me so let us expand the scope and scale of consciousness so that we may aspire
to understand the universe there's like three tweets in one but curiosity yeah
yeah curiosity for its own sake what's that saying um i think dorothy parker
said uh the cure for boredom is curiosity there's no cure for curiosity and you
need to celebrate so let me just briefly mention to my lovely friends at mit to
celebrate different weirdness to celebrate the weird characters i've um i
sometimes get loving pressure from my lovely friends at mit to tone down the
weirdness a bit really even from mit i'm very fortunate to have a lot of
leverage to where i have completely resist the pressure but i'm very sure that
there's young faculty that with that subtle pressure would um dissolve them into
a puddle of tears not no no they're from boston excuse me from boston that's
right they're tougher than that that's right but it's a slight nudging towards
conformity that i think ultimately destroys um or at least lessens the uh the
power of the kind of science that you can do when you encourage diversity
diversity in all of its forms including the weirdness of ideas the out of the
box thinkers including the flamboyant behavior online uh how you choose to
educate how you choose to inspire you know people talk about freedom of speech
but it's not just like freedom of speech to say controversial things it's also
freedom of speech to be weird like if you're for some reason fascinated in uh
like you look at elon musk he talks about sex a lot let the guy put sex memes up
who cares like i mean i feel like elon can do basically whatever he wants right
there's no pressure but there's a bunch of elons in the academic world there's a
bunch of ela uh no actually sorry let me backtrack because the man deserves
props right he's unparalleled he's he's a ceo of major companies you better
believe there's pressure to behave more like a ceo as opposed to a giggling
school boy who's posting memes throughout the night but that is him and that
freedom that's what freedom looks like i talked to a lot of ceos and a lot of
them feel like uh caged birds who have long ago forgotten how to sing quite
honestly like they they there's like shareholders and they come up with excuses
for themselves here's why i have to be this way you have to understand so on
there's pr there's marketing people there's lawyers there's all that kind of
stuff but the final result is the authenticity suffocated the the beautiful
weirdness of a ceo of a leader of a creator of a scientist all that that's all
uh that's all gone well steve steve jobs wouldn't have kept his job in acting
the way he did in his 20s and 30s in today's climate but he probably would have
updated his uh his protocols so a little bit but maybe yeah screaming at
employees i mean these are these are anecdotes right i call them anecdata
because people treat them as data but they're they're really just anecdotes we
don't know i wasn't there um but you know i i like the idea of authenticity
without over sharing right you're very authentic but there are aspects to your
life that i'm aware of that your audiences will never be aware of and there are
aspects of your life that i'll never be aware of and so you're still authentic
but yeah which wait which ones are you aware people are going to wonder like
what what is do you think i'm going to sex dungeon what is this no no no but
interesting but interesting choice of examples um no but i think that um you
know people lose lose careers on the basis of the movement of their thumbs right
i mean the chair of psychiatry at columbia recently lost his position based on a
response to a tweet people can look that up this is one of the most famous
psychiatry departments in the world and he put something out there that was very
insensitive uh frankly and um everyone that i talked to about it was like gosh
that was very very insensitive not thoughtful at all and and he lost his job
right or at least had to step down i don't know the specifics so um you know i i
think i read someplace that more than half of the uh job loss due to online
behavior is because people were trying to be funny right i mean not everyone can
pull off what tim dillon oh and by the way congratulations i heard that you and
just got married yeah no no we didn't just get married yeah he proposed let's go
got it got it got it and i said um yes right so some people can get away oh yeah
thank you thank you sergey has that has that 13.3 000 likes one of those is mine
uh so for people who are not aware one of the days in april tweeted that tim
dillon asked me to get married and i said yes i think tim uh said the wedding
will be on sixth street in austin bring all of your weapons which of course is
totally inappropriate this is this is i i was i was like uh pg funny and he's
goes rated r uh funny right away but that said i mean if there's anyone i i
would like to get married with this it's that guy and he would do it in austin
and it would it would it would be epic it would be like the uh the wedding from
november rain um one of them mr mrs oh wow oh mr mister i apologize well yeah
and you broke and you broke tradition with the with the jacket color so it
sounds to me that you are a free speech absolutist i think freedom is really
important and that includes letting people who are hateful letting people who
are controversial have a voice on platforms but it becomes i'm not sure what
exactly to think because um i also treasure the quiet voices in the back of the
room and sometimes the assholes um silence those voices meaning by being loud
and obnoxious and so on it pushes away the thoughtful people so i'm also a fan
of creating communities like you should be able to let people kind of build a
community that's positive that's loving or that's constantly trolling or that's
super hateful all those communities should have a place in the world but like
the thing i've noticed is that hate can destroy a community full of hate and
destroy community full of love easier than a community full of love can overtake
one with hate and so you have to kind of i don't know exactly how but create
digital mechanisms that discourage the collision of these communities they
should all have a platform an ability to speak to a large audience but i just
you have to be careful to protect that like little flame of um of connection
that people have that's good the goodness it sounds like i mean the um yeah i
think you you you know in any great city like new york which i love by the way
um you want to have a symphony and an opera house and you want some punk rock
shows happening on the lower east side you you want all of that you just don't
necessarily want them to overlap in terms of social media you know and then
podcast and engagement one thing that i decided very early on is was to
encourage comments and feedback etc but i have in my mind what i call classroom
rules you've taught in the university and then you teach in the university and
they're certain you establish a certain etiquette within the classroom of the
kinds of questions that you'll tolerate right so there's always the student
that's going to ask a question which is basically a 10-minute monologue about
their experience that really isn't a question that pertains to a lot of people
so you you um politely discourage that kind of question and you encourage the
kinds of questions that are likely to be in the minds of many other students
it's just more efficient that way or not politely which is more yeah you know i
try and respond to comments and i try and respond but also you know there's this
also this really interesting question now if you block people or restrict people
people think that you're somehow afraid of the information that they're posting
but that's often not the case i'm not in the habit of blocking or restricting
too many people occasionally we've had to do it only because of how other people
are being treated in the comment section what i can take and what i think other
people deserve to take are two completely different things david goggins right
who we both know well um i don't know if he still does this but a few years ago
he posted something like if people ask him when do you sleep he would just block
them yeah because it wasn't consistent with what he was trying to say of course
he sleeps but it's you know he's trying to get a particular message out i think
people should just understand that everybody's page is their own to moderate
right just like in a classroom there are certain rules of course of institution
but then you establish the etiquette within the context of the kind of class you
know a class about personality psychology or the psychology of love you're going
to have a very different range of of conversations than uh you know a class on
um you know membrane physiology so i i think social media is a great place for
conversation but it's not necessarily a great place for every kind of
conversation yeah and i also just say the people that do get blocked i never
this is something i do very deliberately blocked or ignored i never think poorly
of them i actually explicitly think if if there's somebody that's like saying
hateful things about me whatever i always think positive thoughts it's not some
kind of weird guru thing but just actually found that as a hack i i think well
of them and that allows me to never think of them again like i send them my love
and like i think this is a like fascinating human being with a fascinating story
i would love to have time to actually learn about their story but there's not
enough time in the world and i just think well of them and then and move on and
enjoy a delicious meal with people that are close to me and i love and so on and
just and move on and never adding to the negativity of like just even in the
privacy of my own mind thinking a hateful thought towards them it serves no
purpose whatsoever yeah i love that about you and i know that what you just said
to be true one of the i think more um toxic things in life is what's called um
you know evacuative projection when people feel something and they try and
evacuate it and project it onto somebody else projection is fascinating right
what you essentially just said is that you don't accept projections in in fact
you transmute them to put in the language of the buddhists you know you
transmute it into positivity and in that way you you you truly neutralize it um
and transmute it i think that if people were better understood when they were
experiencing or observing evacuative projection um the world would be a much
healthier and happier place but it requires a certain a stable internal rudder
and um you know when we're tired or sick or angry you know we are hungry
excessively hungry um all of us are less less good at it i've been positively
struck by the nature of most of the interactions not just feedback but my
favorite thing as an educator in the classroom but also on social media my
absolute favorite thing is when the comments to about other people's comments
are positively reinforcing so you see people having conversations within the
comments yeah and you realize this is like if you as an educator again you know
you it's fun to teach and it's fun to talk to the students but the real
pleasures in walking by a small group of students on campus and hearing them
talking about the material that's that just fills me with joy and because what
it means is that the ideas are reverberating in their nervous systems and will
eventually wick out to others so it's not just about feedback it's about a venue
for for parsing information so you actually posted that we're gonna talk on
instagram and i collected a bunch of the questions which reminds me of i i have
to um mention mike jones and a question he asked but also a gift he gave quite a
while ago if it's okay but first uh quick bathroom break yes we're looking at
instagram page of mike jones knife and tool you should check it out he get he uh
andrew gave me a gift from him that is a badass a butcher knife yours is the
earth da da da is from if you're kipling yeah the story of this knife is kind of
interesting perhaps to people where it was i was coming out here to austin to
meet with lex and it was his birthday i want to get him a gift but i didn't know
what to get him and i contacted this guy mike jones that i learned about through
joe rogan because the first remember in the old days of joe rogan when you go on
the episode afterwards you'd take a picture with an object so it's like elon
with a flamethrower or people would have the axe i picked up this um bushwhacker
hatchet thing nice and i was like i love this thing and and joe said oh yeah you
should check out mike jones's work he does these beautiful knives and so then i
heard your episode with joe and you recited a poem at the end it was right after
your grandmother died and there's a line in that poem from from if that um mike
engraved on that knife for you so he makes these by by hand i love scratch the
old days [Laughter] before the podcast and the first appearance that was the
first time on there and um it was a lot of fun um in the old in the old studio
in los angeles and um yeah mike makes these beautiful knives and i have this in
i just have a great admiration for crafts people yeah so yeah do you use it do
you cut your your one meal a day steaks i feel are you taking it with you on
your travels exactly i actually uh used to keep it on the table but i thought it
it really intimidates guests a little bit but like you put it on their side yeah
yeah right it's like oops it's trust right what's what's the story i mean yeah
so but it's because it's not it's it's uh quite badass if i may say so the
craftsmanship is obvious but also it is a knife it's got some like dexter like
qualities to it yeah it looks like it's designed to to cleave through a limb if
i had like a family or something where people there's nothing about this place
that softens your kind of sense that this my person might not murder me let's
put it differently uh this place could use a woman's touch that's one way to put
it if it's okay let me because it is it is a poem i um go go to often actually
uh you mentioned reciting some lyrics and i'm actually gonna go back to that at
some point to get get a few songs that touch you um but this is one of the
things i i go too often i i i'll read it to remind myself it's uh advice from
from father to son and it's a kind of mantra that it's just nice to live by so
if it's killing me just use this opportunity one more time read if by rojak
kipling if you can keep your head when all about your losing theirs and blaming
it on you if you can trust yourself when all men doubt you but make allowance
for their doubting too if you can wait to not be tired by waiting or being lied
about don't deal in lies or being hated don't give way to hating and yet don't
look too good nor talk too wise if you can dream and not make dreams your master
if you can think and not make thoughts your aim if you can meet with triumph and
disaster and treat those two imposters just the same if you can bear to hear the
truth you've spoken twisted by nays to make a trap for fools or watch the things
you gave your life to broken and stoop and build them up with worn out tools if
you can make one heap of all your winnings and risk it all on one turn of pitch
and toss and lose and start again at your beginnings and never breathe a word
about your loss if you can force your heart to nerve and sin you to serve your
turn long after they're gone and so hold on when there's nothing in you except
the will which says to them hold on if you can talk with crowds and keep your
virtue i like this one and walk with kings nor lose the common touch if neither
foes and their loving friends can hurt you if all men count with you but none
too much if you can fill the unforgiving minute with 60 seconds worth of
distance run yours is the earth and everything that's in it and which is more
you'll be a man my son thank you andrew thank you thank you mike for the knife
it's a i don't know it's it's it's beautiful and engraved in it yeah it's yours
yours is the earth and everything that's in it we toiled over what to engrave
and then finally i just said mike just pick something that speaks to you you're
the craftsman and so he selected that there's certain ways to pull yourself in
that book actually uh carl diaser daisarath he wrote the book projections one of
my favorite first of all just as you said incredible writer just amazing just i
mean um if you wrote fiction if you wrote those kinds of things i'm curious to
see where he goes with his writing it's very interesting i think that book took
him 10 years to write which is vindication for me and for you because we're both
supposed to write books and we haven't done it yeah i mean you know in some
sense you're um first book will have you know decades in it right even if you
just take uh half a year to write it it's like the first book like the first
album for a musician i mean it's a light it's a journey it's a it's a it's ever
but he he uses uh poems and quotes in there really well it's a beautiful book
it's a dreamy book i think when people hear that it's a book about neuroscience
they think they're going to get a textbook or a protocols book or something it's
nothing like that but it really is a deep dive into the mind of the psychiatrist
and the researcher and so much feeling and compassion i love that you love
poetry i mean i didn't know that until i saw you on rogan read if um and i'm not
a very uh rabid consumer of poetry but i i'm a big wendell berry fan um uh and i
try and read a poem once every few days also i think it if is a tough act to
follow oh yeah yeah oh yeah i mean that's the richness and the i mean you said
ev every third line in there is something that you would you know you'd consider
your life well lived if you if you said that right what about the uh preparation
for the solo podcast you said you listen to certain songs you know you sing or
recite the lyrics certain songs is there ones that kind of come to mind that are
interesting um yeah i've always been very lyrics driven and i don't understand
music i've talked to rick about this i think i've talked to you about this a
little bit i don't really understand i mean i can hear music and like it but i
don't really understand the structure of it but lyrics make a lot of sense does
it touch your soul music or is it the lyrics it's the lyrics it's not the
instrumentals so i'm a huge joe strummer fan and i'm gonna lose punk points for
saying this but i'm not a clash fan oh okay so he obviously is best known for
the clash most clash song started off great and then after about 30 seconds in
at least in my mind just kind of disintegrated into a bunch of mush whereas um
joe strummer and the mescaleros which is what he did as an adult as a you know
later and some of his solo work he actually rick produced some work that he did
with johnny cash you know rick pulled johnny cash out of essentially out of
retirement and had him do his albums before he he died and um so anything that
strummer did there's a there's a favorite song of mine by strummer it's called
burning lights um you can find it there is an album now where you can find it or
tennessee rain or some of these things that he did which are a little bit more
folky so not really punk so i love that song um a bunch of songs by rancid that
i love you know and then if i listen to instrumentals i do um i'll listen to
classical piano some dreams are made for children but it's not going to sound
good as a poem they can play this people can play the song okay yeah so i'll all
i mean because it has to be something joe's voice is what makes the song got it
um joe's voice is what makes the song but yeah that song burning lights from i
married uh i hired a contract killer or the licks are pretty good they're pretty
good i mean joe is an amazing writer right i'm you know i'm also a big bob dylan
fan um glenn gould for classical piano he was at asperger's you know and um and
actually i think you can hear him grunting he had a tourette's like tick um and
i learned about glenn gould from oliver sacks um so i'll listen to any number of
things it depends on my mood if i'm feeling a little more tired and i need to be
amped up i'll listen to something that's a little louder and faster if i'm
feeling kind of keyed up and i need to bring the cadence down a little bit um
then i'll listen to something a little mellower poppier i i love bands like um
yeah i'm a big fan of this um british pop band called james there's like 20
bands named james but this one you know and again i lose punk points for saying
that but they're amazing uh and best of luck you've accumulated enough points
where you can afford to view to yeah um but in any case uh yeah music and poetry
are they're they're the they're the subconscious right i mean if you think about
a bob dylan song or a really good strummer song or a poem that the the words
don't mean anything when read linearly but they make you feel something they're
tapping into the subconscious that's really what they're doing they're pulling
on neural threads of emotion based on either timbre or cadence or something
that's independent of the word structure and that to me is the beauty of music
and poetry i often say johnny cash's version hurt that i say would be my
favorite song ever he did a nine inch nail song he did he caught i think rick
produced that he pretty sure he yes he produced it i mean he did like the rick
produced the he pulled johnny cash out from a dark place to produce something
that um i mean when you look back is one of the great things ever in music which
is these like uh haunting covers of certain songs and originals johnny cash and
joe strummer did a version of redemption song together that is uh that rick
produced which is um on loop in my house sometimes you know for hours and hours
that song is fascinating bob marley's song sung by johnny cash and joe strummer
you know sometimes i think what it would be to be a fly on the wall when these
guys were doing this these songs of freedom there's certain songs where you're
like it it um elicit an emotion that's unlike anything else i mean i was i was
trying to figure that out with w with rick too like there's certain songs that
make you want to pull up over to the side of the road and just weep or just uh
get inspired to just get shit done or all those kinds of things or remember your
family the people you've lost all that kind of stuff me hurt i hurt myself today
to see if i still feel there's certain songs that um i've loved so much that i
actually won't play them during a relationship until the relationship passes a
certain duration because you if you start sharing in those experiences with
somebody in the room and it starts to become associated with the relationship
you braiding it in with the dopamine of of love and that relationship ends the
song is forever tainted there are certain songs that i will never play in the
company of anybody else yeah they're mine i just some it's too risky to uh to
give those up um and uh you know and i think that um there's like levels they're
levels right exactly we'll leave it at that yeah and uh the interesting thing
about this kind of preparing for the solo episode uh just interacting with rick
about that process of preparation and because you mentioned uh with interviews
by the way so are you doing solo solo are you the only one in the room or no
i've well it used to be rob my producer who um i should say you know he's really
the person behind the the podcast i mean we're first of all we're equal partners
you're just a pretty face uh we're just um and i'm aging man not to not so i
love him i like aging it's weird a lot of people like friends with david
sinclair and it's all about not aging i i'm i don't want to live past 90 95. i'm
just trying to get as much done as i can in this short life and do it right and
with integrity and heart and accuracy you know um and you like the stages oh
yeah if you read erickson's stages of development you realize that every stage
of life is a is a set of neural circuits trying to resolve a problem and um and
if you're going to try and avoid that progression sure you might live longer but
um you know it's sort of like saying like do you want to go win the uh high
school jujitsu championship no you graduated high school a long time ago right
so i actually look forward to the future um even if it means that i'm starting
to shift i think that uh my biology will shift you know i'll fight that i try
and take good care of myself but um i don't want to get sick i don't want to
suffer who does but i i'm embracing this whole developmental arc i mean we don't
we're not children and then adults our entire life is one long developmental arc
and if you fail to embrace that you fail to extract the richness of of what it
is to be a human being so um in any event for the um i record uh rob is in the
room i'll sometimes stop and ask him for feedback if i feel like something's not
landing right so he gives if it's clear he'll let me know if it's not clear
he'll let me know excuse me and then you know costello used to be in the room
the early days of the podcast which weren't that long ago he's snoring at my
feet and farting and smelling up the room and we're all just kind of like
gasping for air he's a bulldog that's what they do uh with him gone it it
changed you know that the whole thing changed there will be another dog soon um
and as you know i uh i've been moving through that grief process but having him
there gave me a levity that um i miss but in my mind he's still there yeah he's
still there yeah he's still there so uh and you know in time there'll be another
dog and and who knows you know maybe there'll be a dog and a couple infants
running around but that would be more distracting so um but it's there's no
podcast that exists just because of the podcaster this is true for joe it's true
for your podcast for me that there's it's not just a staff of people that post
stuff that's just the top level contour there's the constant feedback and
iteration of what you want it to become and trying to hold on to something
that's essential along the way because everything has to evolve but you can't
lose the the essence of something anytime a company or brand or a course or a
scientist has done that it just ends up terrible it just is a you know it
becomes like a cenotar version of itself so to rick is very the the power of the
people in the room is great to in to inspire and to destroy so you have to be
extremely careful with the selection of people that are in the room to me i
never really thought of it that way i i i thought only only positive things
could happen oh by adding people by adding people oh i think if there were in an
audience in the room well you know what someday i'd love to do a live podcast
with you um we're just i saw you doing like a a couple of live things which is
great that you're paving the way there to well we did try things i went up to
university of british columbia um uh and did a lecture on a on a college campus
and one of the more gratifying things that happens this guy this kid in his
early 20s i think stood up and said you know i've never been on a college campus
i didn't think i could go on to a college campus and that i still rings on my
mind whoever you are out there that meant so much to me because i was like yes
there was something about that to me i was like okay this it made sense to come
all the way up here and do this in person because you can get out to a lot more
people online public speaking events it's not like it's that lucrative or
anything i mean unless you're whatever you're a famous celebrity or politician
or something i'm sure there are people that do well with it but that's not what
it's about for us it's really about being able to connect with people in a
different venue and for interactions like that i don't know how many of them we
will do um but i'm curious to see how it goes but i'd love to do a podcast with
you is it energizing my fear is the the fear of the introvert is that i don't
know if i can handle so much love and fascinating people all around it's like i
don't know well we'll invite a few haters too yes but i love the haters too but
i don't know it makes me nervous because jordan peterson's currently on tour i
got a chance to hang out with him well right he does he does um a lot of live
speaking yeah he does like he's not on tour where he does like every other day
and but he doesn't have any small kids at home anymore so no so yeah you should
do it before you're also exhausting i mean i'm just speaking from an athlete
perspective like if you're mick jagger with the rolling stones it's just
physically i mean you have to speak potentially for two hours then off stage
like hanging out with people it's a while it's a lot of hours it's a lot of
hours to stay focused to keep finding your place of like calmness and excitement
well and you're staying in hotels your circadian rhythms disrupted you're not
getting your like cold and sauna and your workout every day your food isn't
optimal um i think done in patches i could enjoy it um because it's fun to meet
people from different places i'm doing a public lecture in copenhagen for the
lundbeck foundation in june june 3rd and that one is particularly gratifying for
me because the lundbeck foundation is an academic foundation so the fact that
and so when they invited i asked you know do you want me to talk about what my
lab does or do you want me to talk about this stuff on the podcast they're like
no no not your laugh you know we wanna hear about this like health stuff and the
stuff that we cover on the podcast so that was amusing to me and tells me that
um you know that things are changing now i think 2020 and 2021 revealed a lot of
things about people to ourselves but one thing that it made very clear is that
there's an enormous appetite for tools for mental and physical health but also
understanding about science and how science is done so thanks to you again i'm
not saying this to flatter you it's true gratitude there is now a a runway for
scientists to talk to people i mean you had that i always forget this guy's name
the virus guy from colombia uh vincent wrecking yellow yeah amazing right i mean
forgetting the controversy around all the stuff of 20 20 21 i mean he is an
encyclopedia of all things virology yeah people should listen to his podcast
this week in virology he's also an incredible lecturer and educator it's uh it's
fascinating it's fascinating yeah when people take again that leap of putting
all that education online that's non-controversial at all it's it's like
everybody they're people should go listen to him for the most part in terms of
at his best at least uh there's no politics in it there's there's there's none
other now he's a virus jockey he likes playing around with bacteria and viruses
and but that said molecular biology we all say stuff carelessly all the time so
he he gets in a bit of trouble on some of the things he said about like
dismissing lab leak theory like there's no way he dismisses that yeah but not
he's not making like folks uh there's a difference when you say stuff uh like
off the cuff and when you say stuff that's like core to your principles and
you've thought about it for a very long time are you're talking for hour for
hundreds of hours and you can just say stuff you could just say your opinions um
will smith uh slap i was wondering okay wait how long have we been recording i
was wondering how long it was gonna take us before someone talked about ukraine
no no will smith yeah i was wondering whether or not we'd make it then i had it
planned yeah i was literally in the back of my mind i had it planned that at the
end if we didn't talk about the will smith chris rock thing that i was going to
say it's amazing this is the first conversation to happen and uh in a long time
where it wasn't mentioned oh no thank you here we go here we go it revealed some
interesting things about um human beings impulse control and uh lack thereof but
um you know oh my goodness chris rock has a material for the rest of his career
yeah i think he's he's not short on material but i do see if i if i knew what i
i wanted to tweet if if i knew you're allowed to just slap comedians my
conversation with tim dillon would have gone very differently people just being
humans i there's so much fascinating human nature on display there um it's also
in terms of it coming it becoming a topic that a lot of people are talking about
versus the war in ukraine for example is also fascinating to watch like just
these kind of news cycles moving through and i think if i may i started
interrupt but um you know anytime we observe something very limbic very
emotional you know we generally can empathize somewhat right we all know it's
like to feel angry we all know it's like to feel ashamed we all know what it's
like to feel shocked images of war are for most people very hard to relate to we
see it it's you know the these images and they're very traumatic and and
challenging to look at at times and yet most people have no idea what it feels
like to be shot at or what it feels like to have your home destroyed or what it
feels like to be um an aggressor in that way so it's very so i think that people
naturally orient towards things that feel familiar to them even though the
circumstances are different and people also forget they look at these
celebrities it's just like looking at criticism of will smith you forget that
they're human too that's that's one of the most surprising things for me having
done this podcast and met celebrities and stuff like that they're human they're
all human and that's inspiring to me like some of these great folks that have
won nobel prizes and built some cool things they're just human like the rest of
us well and if you look at actors and actresses i mean there's some amazing ones
right and who also do well in the outside life but their careers were built on
the business of pretending to be other people yeah and that's got to distort
maybe positively but also just let's be honest what it is that the
neuroplasticity there the changes in the areas of the brain that represent
personality have to be quite different for somebody who pretends to be lots of
different personalities and gets paid for it you're working the reward system
into the system of self-identity and you know you have to imagine that that can
really contort somebody's neurology in ways that maybe they are not as in maybe
they are not in touch with reality in the same way that we are remember earlier
we talked about neurotic versus psychotic you know they may be more borderline
in their kind of ground state than than we think and so i'm actually impressed
anytime there's a celebrity who doesn't have a messed up life yeah i'm like oh
wow you know finally somebody who's managed to you know maintain a some
semblance at least from the outside of normalcy so first of all i can empathize
with the actions that will smith did right they're not i think they're kind of
sh not kind of they're just shitty you should probably talk privately man-to-man
uh not because otherwise it's like a dramatic display it's like it's almost like
you are a fake act you're acting well they're all these questions right i mean
obviously it was aggressive at some level there's this question of whether or
not it was impulsive i think most people feel yes there's a question there was
the protective nature of it because he was doing it to you know in it apparently
to in defense but then there's also the the context he lost touch with the
context right um whereas chris rock basically gets um there there's the possible
critique that he went too far that's going to be in the eye of the beholder um
but then and depending on how you view comedy and jokes but then there's also
the fact that he took that slap and then just snapped right back so much so that
people thought maybe it was fake yeah he also waited with his hands behind his
back that's just natural he likes to stand like that i mean i okay um the i i
gotta tell a little bit of a story here to connect um to what chris rock did
like i i wish what chris rock did in terms of just taking this lap and keep
going first of all just props for somebody that's able to maintain cool in that
situation for the most part i think i'd like watched it once you only have to be
alive on this planet yeah i know too it's hard to see it you can't avoid seeing
it i wish at that afterwards he would sort of say something loving and kind to
will smith and his wife and then hit him real hard lean into the joke see and
but there i think in hockey they call taking a number of a friend who plays
hockey and there's this idea that like if someone checks you really badly in one
game you don't go and check them again you don't get into a fight but three
games later three games you like you blade them in the shin yeah like you so
what the the ability to defer and to handle it in whatever fashion one feels is
it they're probably also friends and all those kinds of things that they respect
each other so he probably didn't but there's a comedian instinct i saw this i
was in an open mic in uh here in texas i don't say where there's many open mics
uh you know we've gone to a few of these these yeah no so there there is more
sort of um rougher kind of yeah you've been hanging out in like west texas yeah
exactly austin's too tame for lex so he's like head to west texas exactly i put
on a cowboy hat and instantly i became a cobb webb and talking like a cowboy i
mean i i belong out there in the desert he's gone from eating you know meat and
athletic greens to rattlesnakes you know exactly right no there was a open mic
is is uh late at night and this i was one of the only people in the audience
there's a couple of drunk folks a few drunk folks one of them was a couple uh
and uh like bikers like uh with helmets and so on a guy and a girl and then the
comedian the open mic comedian did a joke about people who wear helmets i don't
know if it was on purpose or not but he did the joke and then the guy about
women who wear helmets and the guy is this exact same situation the guy stood up
walked up to him there was no slap it's so interesting because this happened
before the will smith thing so he he walked up to the uh to the comedian and and
said he like uh he he i think he like pointed his finger down and told him to
stop or something like that and then sat down this is an audience of like six
people and uh at midnight around then there's no nobody no security nothing in
texas in texas which implies oh then this guy was the energy drunk but also a
biker and his what he felt his lady was now attacked by the comedian right with
his words and this and the comedian was a kind of out of shape small guy this
was not threatening at all and probably in trouble and the comedian after he sat
down he looked a little bit scared he paced back and forth and then he did the
joke again wow and i was sitting and i started i i leaned back and i i just did
this like because that is comedy and the guy was getting angry and angry and he
just sat there and and uh the community went on for a couple more minutes and
then did another bad joke but another joke about how it's just like he leaned
into it if you go to a small comedy club open mic or otherwise you're in the
shooting gallery like you're basically there teed up as a pin to get it uh we
went and saw andrew scholes in san francisco in san francisco yeah it was
hilarious it was amazing i mean he's just masterful in his ability to command an
audience you know and but i felt for the people up front but you know no
sympathy either because you know you buy tickets to sit up front at a shoal show
you know you're gonna get it but he was very loving yeah and funny first of all
he's funny the funniness really helps you but the the the ethic of the comedian
is like that fearlessness i what i really liked this is like the the danger
there's risk to comedy and there's also consequences have you watched that show
the um what is it the marvelous miss maisel show it's really good um i watched a
few of them um guilty pleasure there she plays a comic in the i think it's
mid-1960s in in new york and um and there's a character that somewhat resembles
lenny bruce it's sort of meant to be lenny bruce um and they're always getting
arrested and this kind of thing i think i learned about it from joe anyway it's
the writing is great it's very funny um but yeah comedy is designed to push
boundaries right and to get and to say the thing that you know uh other people
aren't feel they can't say not something in science right science you're
supposed to etiquette is a big part of how you communicate ideas it's about
constraining communication this is something i mean i confess on the podcast in
the goals of making it clear interesting surprising and actionable you know you
have to constrain the amount and the style of information otherwise it becomes
something else altogether right i saw sandra perchai google ceo said that he
likes uh the thing you mentioned not the yoga nitro but the the nsdr non-sleep
deep breast uh podcast over meditation i don't know if you saw that yeah i saw
that yeah yeah yeah uh why what what do you think that is what anything the
difference is yeah so non-sleep deep breath nsdr is an acronym that i coined
because it encompasses a lot of practices that are not meditation per se but
that bring the brain and body into a state of relaxation and focus so hypnosis
is one variant of nstr there are other variants of nsdr you can just look these
up and you'll find them and i think that they've caught on and that the google
the ceo of google uh is an avid practitioner of nsdr because it has this amazing
ability to reset your energy levels and focus whereas with meditation many
people find meditation hard and part of the reason they find it hard is that it
requires focus nsdr is a state which is very calm and relaxing you don't have to
work too hard you're just listening to a script whereas most forms of meditation
not all but most forms of meditation involve cranking up the activity in your
prefrontal cortex and trying to see your thoughts as opposed to thinking your
thoughts or focus on your breath but then third personing yourself in some
respect and that's work and so many people who meditate quite intensely feel
more exhausted now that doesn't mean that meditation doesn't have any utility
but it's distinctly different than nsdr and i think that people are working
certainly the ceo of google aftermath is working very hard and using his
forebrain if he's going to have 20 or 30 minutes to take a break he should and i
think this is what he's doing he should go out for a jog and not listen to
anything and just kind of let his mind wander or sit there in a chair and just
zone out or do nsdr the problem is people are not that good at shifting states
we are all actually pretty good at even people with severe adhd we did an
episode about this can become hyper focused on things that they actually enjoy
because dope and most of the drugs designed to treat adhd are drugs that
increase the levels of dopamine so when you like something there's dopamine
releasing you can focus it's when you don't like something that's hard to focus
shifting states is hard i'm sure you've experienced this if you've ever been in
deep research or podcasting podcasting and then all of a sudden you go for a run
you probably spend the first third of that run thinking and then in the middle
30 you're kind of that thinking is is fractured a bit and then in the final
third is where you finally get to relax because the brain doesn't shift states
very quickly we can go from sleep to wakefulness quickly we can go from
wakefulness to sleep quickly but we don't shift between different states of
consciousness like a step function except in rare cases right fear is one all of
a sudden we hear an explosion right now it's a step function we're in fear or
we're in alertness right um a heightened state of alertness but nsdr is terrific
at allowing people to learn to shift their state and i actually would venture to
argue that part of the value of meditation and exercise is the actual state that
you get into in deep meditation or exercise but just as valuable is the
transition that you have to take yourself through from one state of mind to the
other and then back again i when i look you know david goggins he always seems
to come up but he re because he represents so many important things drive
determination override of emotional state going from being a 300 pound plus
person to a fit person through he's never revealed anything substantial about
what he ate or what he didn't he basically says like listen run a lot eat less
right but what's remarkable is so much of what he says is about those
transitions about taking oneself from a state of i don't want to to scruffing
oneself like you're going to do it anyway and then being able to carry that into
into regular life so to speak so i think that um nsdr is immensely powerful it's
zero cost and one of the reasons i'm such a fan of people doing it is that most
people don't stick to a meditation practice there are also been a few cases you
might find this interesting there's a book by scott carney i forget what it's
called i think it's called the transcendence trap or something i'm going to have
that title wrong but there have been a fair number of cases of people that go
and do very extensive meditation silent meditation retreats who then return to
normal life and end up killing themselves there are states of mind inside of
extended meditations or silent meditations that are very beneficial and i'm
certainly not suggesting people don't meditate but i know at least one person
who came back from one of these long extended meditation retreats and wasn't
able to shift their state back into one that was functional in regular life and
that book includes a very dramatic story i don't want to give it away in case
people check out the book but scott told the story to me directly once where
someone feels they've reached enlightenment and then commits suicide so these
very unusual brain states are are potentially hazardous if people can't return
from them so it's nice to focus not on those brain states but instead on the
shifting right i do this morning i woke up a little bit earlier than i would
have liked i use this revery app that's research backed rev ri.com there's a
free version of it and or you can try it for free so i feel that's fine for
hypnosis and i do a self-hypnosis to put me back into sleep and if i can't sleep
just put me into a state of deep relaxation i would i would put um hypnosis
under the category of nsdr yoga nidra under the category of nstr there are now
some nsdr scripts online if you just go to youtube that are you can just listen
to and do you like those i do yeah i think the one from made4 is quite good i
have an affiliation with them but it's free so i feel comfortable mentioning it
i do i i really like the reverie app um i can very and as you the more you do
them the more quickly you can shift your brain into a state of deep relaxation i
will sometimes stop mid podcast if it's sometimes our recordings go seven eight
hours and i'll stop and i'll do a one minute hypnosis they have one minute
hypnosis inside reverie you're only going to you're only going to find that one
minute hypnosis is effective if you are routinely doing 10 and 15 minute
hypnosis in addition to that meaning i do it every other day or so at 10 or 15.
so there's a is there a youtube uh one minute hypnosis or is this there are but
inside of reverie as well you can find them online a really good pull it up
sorry please um yeah so reverie is good and then michael seeley s-e-a-l-e-y he
has some long hypnosis scripts but again these are all free and you know there's
a lot of good research now on the neural networks and it shifts your so-called
default network default mode network it shifts how much of your forebrain you're
using and it also is very very good if you i get so many questions about hey i'm
really upset i found out about my girlfriend's sexual past or hey i'm so upset i
found out that my boyfriend was cheating or oh so-and-so died how do i get over
these emotions how do i deal with them and hypnosis has shown to be very useful
for people to learn to bring themselves into a state of deep relaxation to
literally project in their mind's eye these very intense things that they don't
like and then for people to associate with other emotions in their body to learn
to be calm while feeling your feelings to dissociate the mind-body communication
to some extent just observe the feelings observe them and start to associate
them with positive experiences you're an android guy so soon it should be
available on android and then it doesn't exist for me yeah uh you know i don't
get android is the device of the people all you elitist people with your iphones
tell me this about android now now you want to this is the one thing that gets
me yeah because i'm very close to someone who uses an android phone i feel like
that so you you have great people in your life that's good to know no their
messages always look green to me but i answer yours not despite that um but they
i feel like the android phones are very trigger happy like anything i touch does
something whereas the apple phone is kind of built for like a macaque monkey to
be able to operate which is great for me because i'm more of a cat monkey and
you're a more sophisticated ape oh i see i see it like i think like you have to
be they're more sensitive yeah you have to have you know i mean i've got fat
fingers you know i've got clumsy fingers yeah so yeah the android is is too well
maybe you need to soften your touch what i would do is go into the most sort by
most popular um because there's some older ones that i really like and it
generally scales with that so i'll do the um this one the hypnosis for clearing
subconscious um negativity that's an hour-long one the sleep and anxiety one 40
minutes but those you listen to as you fall asleep as you fall asleep but we're
gonna do this now yeah let's listen to it and i have created this hypnosis
recording for you to help you and this is the voice how often does the voice pop
up and at the same time you don't watch it you just listen to your anxiety now
one of the most important things the outset of any self-hypnosis experience is
to know and understand hypnosis people really should know that stage hypnosis is
about the hypnotist getting you to do things you wouldn't normally do self-
hypnosis which is what we're talking about here reverie in this is about you
getting your brain into the state that you want and um again i mean there's a
ton of neuroimaging data and work on trauma and pain relief and our labs are
working on this with david spiegel's lab i i really encourage people to explore
nsdr and if this feels a little too wacky and out there then i would just put in
nsdr into youtube and there's some good nstr scripts yes that's by the way uh
sanders is a fan of your podcast no that's okay we don't need to play yeah so i
don't know him and um uh but i would yeah a lot of uh media outlets picked up on
his love of nsdr and i have to imagine running google involves a lot of juggling
a lot of he's one of the great ceos because everybody loves them everybody loves
them have you interviewed him no but we'll do the interview eventually so is
this annoying thing about me being a stickler for three hours ceos don't seem to
understand like not understand but it's scheduling so what happens is saunders
said yes definitely let's do it i'm a fan of podcasts as a fan of yours and and
and then it goes to his executive assistant like oh let's find a slot and then
they immediately think all right well one hour it's good 45 minutes 90 minutes
by zoom 90 minutes yeah right well no they know in person i'm sticking on that
but like it's like no we need more and it's so hard to to do you still travel to
do your podcast or generally no most people come down here most people uh but
for certain situations obviously um like if you're in prison right um or you're
ahead of me if you get out on work for a lot of people have anklets so that they
can go to the lex friedman podcast it probably happened have you ever been in a
prison no you know uh either a visitation or on the inside from my hike i can
see san quentin it's really weird that san quentin and alcatraz you know bay
area beautiful everyone thinks that you know like there's the bay and there's
alcatraz and san quentin sitting right there does that make you feel um you know
it's amazing how easy it is to overlook that they're there and forget that
they're there but when i drive by san quentin i think about it um i also think
about the people who are in there who might be innocent i've seen some of those
episodes on rogan and elsewhere and amanda knox talks a lot about this right
whether or not you believe her story or not i happen to believe her story uh
personally based on what i know um you know i'm sure there are people disagree
with me i think to myself what it must be like to be in a cell and know in your
heart's heart you didn't do it you know i mean i can't think of i can't think of
many things worse i can't think of many things worse that's so clearly unjust
but life is full of unjust things like this uh cruel things happen all the time
you lose a loved one for no good reason you lose your job um you lose your home
yeah i've been talking to a lot of refugees now and uh the war in ukraine has
really focused my mind to how much suffering there is in the world and so just
cruel things happen all the time and and people kind of there's the suffering
and you you kind of go on you stick to the people really close to you there's
still love all around you traumatic events kind of focus your mind on this like
very practical like okay how do we solve the problem how do we escape let's salt
like survival food shelter focus remember that book um i was quiet on the
western front world war one there's this line in there i forget what it is about
how war is like the smell of a skunk like a little bit is actually a little bit
is slightly um there's something slightly delicious of it is what it says in the
in the book um i happen to like the smell of like ferrets and skunks and things
i had a pet ferret when i was a kid and i like that musky scent people most
people just it's repulsive to them it's actually a gene believe it or not some
people have the gene that makes that the musky scent repulsive some people love
it um let me ask you this there's another gene this is a fun one um microwave
popcorn smells good neutral or disgusting to you good very good there are people
who have a gene that leads them to the perception that the smell of microwave
popcorn that you find is good it smells like putrid vomit to them it's a
particular gene variant and they can smell certain elements within the microwave
popcorn it's pretty it's prominent in france the uh this gene and um so in
laboratories where uh you have a lot of french people it's often said like
you're not allowed to make microwave popcorn it smells putrid disgusting you
know so a lot of it's in the perception of the beholder right uh but okay before
i leave the nsdr is uh focus in general as you said it's for shifting mind
states is there advice you have for how to achieve focus on a task yes first of
all we have to distinguish between modulators and mediators and i'll do this
very briefly there are a lot of things that will modulate your state of focus
but they don't directly mediate your sense of focus so for instance if right now
a fire alarm went off in this building it would modulate our attention we would
get up and leave it'd be very hard to do what we're doing with that banging in
the background at least at first so it's modulating focus but it's not really
involved in the mechanisms of focus right in the same way being well rested when
you sleep your autonomic nervous system that adjusts states of alertness and
focus and calm works better than when you're sleep deprived so if you're
sleeping better you're going to focus better so i always answer this way to a
question like this because the best thing that anyone can do for their mental
health physical health and performance in athletic or cognitive endeavors or
creative endeavors is to make sure that you're getting enough quality sleep
enough of the time for you and that's going to differ we could talk about what
that means now in terms of things that mediate focus without getting in the
description of mechanisms because we have podcasts about that it's very clear
that mental focus follows visual focus provided that you're a sighted person
much of the training that's being done now in china to teach kids to focus
better literally has them stare at a target blinking every so often but really
training themselves to breathe calmly and maintain a tight visual aperture when
you read you have to maintain a tight visual aperture you're literally scrolling
like a highlighter in your mind's eye right it's kind of obvious once you hear
it so for people that have problems focusing sleep well learn to dilate and
contract your visual field consciously this can be done if you practice it a
little bit and then be as i said before it is very hard to get into a state of
focus like a step function immediately like snapping your fingers what you can
do is you can pick any object but ideally an object at roughly the same distance
placed it roughly the same distance to which you're going to do that work and
stare at it you're allowed to blink and as your mind starts to drift every once
in a while to understand that's normal but try and narrow your visual aperture
and bring that into your visual field so that that's the most prominent thing
kind of like portrait mode in your phone this would look very different in
portrait mode than it would in just a standard photograph mode and then after
doing that for 30 to 60 seconds moving into the work that you're about to do and
really encourage yourself to do that if you're somebody who's low vision or no
vision you're going to use your ears to do this braille readers have trouble
focusing sometimes because they feel other stuff and they hear other stuff so
you you learn to adjust that aperture consciously and then of course the
pharmacologic tools just enough caffeine but not too much right we've talked
about white noise brown noise music or no music really varies but it's very
clear that binaural beats of 40 hertz can shift the brain into a heightened
state of focus and cognition so if you're going to use binaural beats which
should definitely be used with headphones and there are a number of free apps
out there in sources uh 40 hertz seems to be the frequency that best supports
the brain shifting into a particular can you give us the some some binaural
beats yeah so you're going to look for you'd want to find a an app that offers
40 hertz i think brainwave allows you to um slide bar up to the particular
frequency that you want and i should say that um there are other frequencies
that are interesting but 40 hertz binaural beat seems to be the one that there's
the most quality research on so it's like it's like a b yeah oh yeah yeah but
you're saying there's a lot of mixed science on the on the yeah brought white
noise and brightness you really should be doing this with headphones because
binaural beats are best accomplished by feeding two different frequencies to the
two ears and then you have what's called the this brain stem area that reads out
what are called interaural time differences and then it extracts the the the
delta essentially turn and then in other things that can enhance focus so you
know the pharmacology around this is pretty interesting things that tickle the
dopamine pathway and acetylcholine by the way they work yeah um there's your
ritalin your adderalls your modafinils which are prescription and there's a lot
of non-prescription use of those prescription drugs not so much in my generation
but in people 35 and younger you know i hear all the time from day traders and
programmers and stuff and kids that play video games a lot of ritalin adderall
use i think that unless it's prescribed by a doctor for a specific purpose of
adhd i don't think people should go that route frankly hits the dopamine system
way too hard also has a number of negative effects on sexual side effects all
sorts of things that you just wouldn't want there are a few compounds like alpha
gpc um 300 milligrams to 600 milligrams of alpha gpc with a cup of espresso if
you're well rested you're like a laser for 90 minutes maybe two hours but then
it's going to taper off and you have to just recognize that and then there's
this whole world of nootropics now and people trying to figure out the racetams
peracetams and phenylethylamine combined with this and you know it's not quite
in the place where you'd like it to be there are a few companies that are doing
this better than others we talked about some of these on the podcast but um i
would always start with behavioral tools and then consider pharmacology and and
then i suppose the the other thing for focus is um they're these this is a
little more esoteric but uh we covered this in an episode on workplace
optimization um where you place your screen is important staring down at a
screen is not going to be as effective as placing it at eye level or above you
when the eyes are up literally or your eyes are directed forward or up the brain
stem centers for alertness are activated when your eyes are down it's actually
you're you're sort of it's like being pulled under water a little bit in the
autonomic arousal sense it's you're closing your eyes i mean um is one it
reflects the brain stem centers that are active becoming less or for alertness
excuse me becoming less active but there's a really cool effect that's active in
this room right now which is that there's been some really interesting studies
that when people work in small compact spaces or wear a hoodie or a hat that can
also improve focus like blinders on a horse for obvious reasons now based on
what i said before but also analytic work or the kind of work where there's a
correct answer that you're seeking is best supported by these kind of low
ceiling environments whereas there's something called the cathedral effect which
is when you work in an outdoor environment or a high ceiling environment it
lends itself to kind of pun intended kind of loftier ideas and more creativity
and that probably has to do with the fact that there's a natural tendency a
reflex to expand your visual field in these high ceiling environments expansion
of the visual field changes the way the brain works in the time domain your
engineering and biology oriented listeners will understand this and music for
those that don't the best way to think about it is when you have a narrow focus
portrait mode on your phone or you're very alert you are fine slicing life in
time it's like a um think of it as a high frame rate like you're shooting in
slow motion when you have a when you dilate your v your view you're taking
bigger time bins and the one way to just let this hopefully land home is that if
you've ever had a really exciting day or podcast interview or experience of any
kind your system is flooded with dopamine and norepinephrine alertness and
motivation all this excitement it seems like it goes by very very fast and yet
when you think back to that it seems like a lot happened this happened and that
happened now think about waiting in the doctor's office in a blank waiting room
with no interesting art on the walls it feels like it goes by very very slow
dopamine and norepinephrine are all time low and yet when you think back on that
experience it's as if nothing happened because you were you were parsing time
differently so those are the roughly the tools and the and the neurochemicals
around time perception and the time domain uh there's a wonderful book i'm
forgetting the title so wonderful i forget the title by dean bordomano from ucla
i think it's called the brain is a time machine that talks about this expansion
and contraction of the time domain and what you can do to leverage it for work
and creativity focus and so on yeah it's fascinating that i think one way to
define focus for me is uh to the experience the feeling of focus is losing track
of time is getting to a place where you're no longer up operating in time well
and you mentioned being you know kind of uh cramming for for something well
you'll release a lot of adrenaline and you'll it is true you can get a lot done
under pressure because of the way that you're slicing time you don't actually
have more time it's that you're finally in a brain state that lends itself well
to parsing information really quickly now if we ramp up your level of stress
enough it's definitely a you know it's a more or less normal distribution we get
you stressed enough it's hard to remember anything you're not parsing time well
but in that middle range almost every study shows that the higher levels of
autonomic arousal meaning norepinephrine adrenaline in your system the more
effective you are at things and we you know we always hear stress and adrenaline
it's just bad bad bad but my colleague ali chrome at stanford has done these
beautiful studies where if you just educate people on how adrenaline makes them
sharper thinkers they become sharper thinkers if you educate them on the fact
that stress makes your cognition worse their cognition gets worse this is why i
don't wear a sleep tracker if you tell people they slept poorly your recovery
score sucks they naturally perform less well the next day than if you tell them
your recovery score is high and so i don't have anything against those companies
but i in fact i we use some of their technology can be very useful in certain
contexts but you want to determine your your mindset around these things and if
you tell yourself hey deadlines make me sharp pressure makes me sharp you will
perform better so stress and anxiety what is that and can it be leveraged for
good absolutely stressing luke whether or not you get into a cold ice bath or a
or a hot sauna so hot you want to get out or you get hit square in the face with
something over text that you really didn't want to hear or see it's adrenaline
it's just adrenaline and so your subjective readout of that and what it means is
really important and you can just channel that well you can if you if you agree
with the following statement which i do and many people do because the data
support it which is ali chrom's statement not mine which is she directs the mind
body lab at stanford she's brilliant by the way um brilliant harvard trained
yale trained trained licensed clinical psychologist also tenured professors you
know she's an uh uh olympian uh no excuse me a division one athlete in
gymnastics and uh martial arts and her dad um is a long time martial arts
trainer he's done work with special forces and he's an amazing human being and
very humble very kind lovely woman and professor scientist she says anything
that you do and experience but especially stress is the consequence of that
thing and what you believe about that thing and so if you consume a lot of
information about the powers of stressful states to bring out your best you will
perform better if you consume a lot of information about the power of stress to
cripple you you will perform worse there's absolutely no question the data are
striking and this is not growth mindset this is just simply what sort of what do
you believe about stress based on the dominant knowledge that you're consuming
about it so that's why it's fun to watch david goggins here we go again david or
jocko or or joe or someone put where cam haines you know put out this
information about or ryan hall who ran for stanford and then now is like into
the power lifting thing and running you know and there are others too of course
when you start to consume a lot of that information it's not just inspiring it
actually changes your perception of what your own stressful states mean they you
can actually get better from stress if you're in the ocean of knowledge that
stress grows you if you're in the ocean of living in the ocean of knowledge i
was thinking like a pool in the summer you got the kiddie pool the kids all
peeing in it presumably you got the diving thing you got the high dive and all
that if you believe that the experience of belly flopping off the high dive is
going to make you a better diver in some sense it at least in this analogy it
will whereas if you feel that it's just the most embarrassing thing ever and
it's going to cripple your ability to get out in the dive in front of anybody
ever again well you're you're right about that too yeah we uh actually talk with
carl about depression all those kinds of things that there could be these what
are commonly seen as negative journeys that could be when reframed can be used
you know one of the reasons i enjoy our friendship so much is that you bring
this russian thing you know which i don't really understand it at a deep level
how could i i'm not russian but um but this mindset like that there's pain in
life when i watched that uh hedgehog in the fog cartoon i thought no wonder
russians the way they do this is the most it's so sad it's beautiful and savage
so sad whereas out here it's like sesame street and you know my mother would not
let me watch sesame street when i was a kid yes she thought it was too chaotic
she's chaos too chaotic she was like it's too chaotic too many things going on
captain kangaroo we were allowed and then mr rogers we were allowed i never
really liked shows i liked doing things in outside in the in the yard um i was
trying to trap all the animals i didn't want to watch stuff on tv but you know
hedgehog in the fog is enough to turn any kid into a thinker and a philosopher
and a poet here we go i fell in love with this when when you showed look it even
walks with its arms behind its back so for people don't know and we're watching
little clips here to get into and it's a hedgehog that is wandering about in
this fog at night and can't even see a lamp the fog is so dead and there's a
there's a feeling of searching and then there's a there's a horse that speaks
from from a distance words of wisdom some people actually told me that they
believe that's god that's supposed to represent god i always thought it was a
motherly voice or a voice a voice of conformity that wants you to return to
safety and here's a the hedgehog is searching for something that's in him for
the unknown to the explore the unknown and ultimately as it um as the cartoon
unrolls it's he discovers a friend in a bear and he also discovers a lifetime
passion for looking up at the stars and the curiosity of exploring what is up
there and i see that as science as exploring the mystery and also i see that as
brave to explore the mystery given all the uncertainty all around you but there
is a melancholy the whole sound of it the feel of it the look of it it was um it
just captures both the melancholy and the wander of childhood which is like
there's a loneliness to it like nobody understands me uh that's there that that
children can can can feel because you're you're trying to figure out my favorite
character right there i love the owl i love the owl the owl shows up every once
in a while i love the owl sorry i i interrupted you there's again there's non-
sequitur it means you're interested seventy percent of the time the other thirty
percent you're just an asshole so you have to figure out there's non-secular
parts in this cartoon it's voted as one of the greatest cartoons of all time
short short little films documentary filmmakers it's a it is uh you know in the
soviet union in in a lot of sort of authoritarian regimes there's channels to
communicate difficult ideas to people and you figure out those channels and in
soviet union one of those channels was children's cartoons so actually they're
very much for adults yeah i i like that um in some countries not so much in the
us uh children are treated with more respect for their intelligence you know and
not constantly getting this drivel of of just kind of moronic explosions and
whistles and bells and the voices that um just kind of you know children
obviously are children and need to be their brains are young and plastic and
need to be treated and nurtured uh as such but they but they have an
intelligence and i think that um you treat them like morons and and they're
gonna behave like morons you treat them as you know people who can uh consume
information and make sense of it in their own way and that's what they're gonna
do they have a seriousness of looking at the world i love people that talk with
children like they're adults well just like yours if you're talking to minnie
einstein because you're like really uh they're asking some big questions and i
think uh i mean people sometimes uh speak of me in this way like how dumb is
this childlike person but like no no there's intelligence in these dumb simple
questions in like that a child asks and i always love those questions the
simplicity but also the depth of the those those questions the reason i started
watching your podcast was you did an episode early on with ray dalio yeah and
the first maybe the first but a question that you definitely asked him was you
just said what is money and his answer was fantastic it's an it's a superb
question and he gave a superb answer and i never would have thought to ask that
question and it's it's the question and it was the question to tee things off
with um so simple questions that get right to the heart of the matter you know
and kids aren't often putting the same uh cultural filters and um you know
they're not kids gen generally aren't concerned about getting canceled either so
they'll ask the question that no one else is willing to ask and they're not
concerned about the how dumb the question sounds i find the most fascinating
questions it's just really really simple and it is a bit embarrassing to ask
those simple questions of what like what is well anything you're asking them for
all of us so please ask them um i think that question what is money is crucial
and i think the simple questions are the most obviously the most interesting
thing i got to ask you about you had awesome podcasts i mean i can ask you
questions about basically all your products people should definitely listen to
the kubernetes but uh with with any gap in the conversation uh he talked about
strength and muscle building all that kind of stuff he's an encyclopedia yeah
and he also works with a lot of ufc fighters and he works with he has a lab that
includes a gym and so he works on endurance and power lifting and also
hypertrophy training etc but he also does muscle biopsy so he runs the full
spectrum and he's a full tenured professor and he does all this stuff so he's a
really unique um person in this whole fitness landscape because there are a lot
of pts out there there are a lot of kinesiologists there are a lot of people
studying nutrition and sports training but he i think he has the among the
people out there he's at least in the top five probably within the top three of
people that really have their arms around the full extent of what's possible
with with training and um and he works with the ufc performance center i mean he
just said a very systematic way of describing things that was really nice you
know um skill speed power strength uh hypertrophy so muscle mass right endurance
all kinds of and then the philosophical of like adaptation how to overload stuff
all that very is there's stuff i'll ask you about ice bath and sauna which was
surprising to me there is there stuff you took away from that conversation like
principles about how to get strong how to build muscle mass that like broaden
and deepen your understanding of that task definitely and i'll do these in
bullet points because if people want the logic behind them in the mechanism they
can listen to that episode that's a really good episode i'll start with heat and
cold really quickly and just say that avoid cold immersion so ice baths and
being in cold water up to the neck uncomfortably cold within the four hours
after a training session that's designed to evoke an adaptation either endurance
hypertrophy or strength because the inflammation that you experience from a hard
endurance workout or from a heart strength or a heart hypertrophy workout is the
stimulus by that you're going to adapt to the cold water immersion reduces
inflammation and can short-circuit some of that after four hours you're probably
okay but if you can do it a different day or you can do it before those sessions
that's better heat however can be done immediately after training and it's
probably beneficial because of the way that it dilates the vascular system and
delivers perfuses the muscles and ligaments etc with more nutrients and i should
just mention that was a crucial piece of information it's a little bit
surprising was it surprising to you absolutely because i actually the way i
posed the question to him about cold was i hear that getting into an ice bath or
a cold water immersion after training can reduce hypertrophy but i'm guessing
it's not that big of a deal and he said no it is a big deal it will short
circuit your progress now for people that are only interested in performance who
are doing a lot of workouts and trying to recover but not trying to grow muscle
get stronger or build endurance then it makes sense to do cold because skill
development skill development or you're an athlete in season you know so you
have to what's so great about andy is he really points out the specific ways to
train given your specific goals so forgetting swole stay out of the ice bath
after a workout there you go lex is always making fun of the meat heads i love
it um i put myself in the meathead category only because i don't do a real sport
now i work out and i run um which is i'm an aspiring meathead okay so one of
these days i'm going to get back to jesus or i'm going to get two jiu jitsu now
in terms of training he has this beautiful three by five concept for strength
pick three exercises compound exercises multi-joint movements do them for do
three to five exercises for three to five repetitions per set rest three to five
minutes and do that three to five times per week and for details you can again
look to the episode it's time stamped but what's interesting about this is three
to five times a week is a lot for a muscle group squatting three five times a
week for five reps meaning you're working pretty heavy meaning you're close to
failure but not failure on for strength generally what andy taught me is that
people who are training mostly for strength can do these low rep type regimens
frequently because most of the adaptation is neural and because you're not
pushing to failure in most cases you don't get that sore and so it's the motor
neurons getting the muscle fibers to contract more intensely or with more
efficiency in other ways that's leading to these strength gains and this is why
power lifters can train every day or five days a week or four days a week for
hypertrophy i learned from andy that the repetition range can be pretty broad
you think anywhere from six to 30 repetitions you should do 10 sets per muscle
group per week maybe even a bit more so high volume high volume but you have to
go to failure or beyond in order to stimulate growth why does it work at such a
great range of repetitions well there apparently are three ways that you
stimulate hypertrophy and maybe more one is tissued microdamage to the tissue
the other is through some sort of tension-based changes in the molecular gene
programs of cells that lead to protein synthesis that don't that are distinct
from damage and the other metabolic effects of like high repetition work of
superfusion of the muscle with blood we know that third category exists because
people are now doing this blood restriction training where they cuff off a
muscle and they'll use a really light weight i've done these before you can use
a five pound weight and do curls with this and you're you are in pain and the
muscles are swelling up with blood it does lead to hypertrophy but in general
you're not sore you're not doing tissue damage and by the way don't just turn
the kid off a muscle because you have to use the proper cuffs um because you
need the blood still to flow in one direction you can't just cinch it off or
you'll potentially kill yourself if you um get a clot or you do it wrong so get
the appropriate cuffs they're out there and then for endurance i learned
something really cool so i i work out basically i go to the gym every other day
on average three or four days a week i do that but generally not two days in a
row it's work out next day i'll do cardio next day and the cardio for me is
always a 30 to 45 minute jog kind of zone two cardio andy informed me that to
build endurance while building strength and maintaining some muscle size or even
building muscle size i would be wise to take one day a week and add to that all
out max heart rate work for 90 seconds at least so do 90 seconds then rest and
then maybe do another 90 second all-out sprint i almost missed my flight going
from los angeles to austin i did that all out sprint in the airport yesterday so
i actually since i think it's done for me so there was a sprinting dr huberman
with three bags that's awesome because i travel i generally i'll travel with too
much stuff um i love how you were probably running late for a flight and used
that as an opportunity to expl well as i was doing it i was thinking to myself
okay andy that's a 90 second sprint because i got to the the security line i
finally got tsc but that's for better that's for extending endurance that's for
yeah it actually has some carryover effects on endurance if you're doing the
other stuff and then he also said one day a week to do this workout and i
haven't done it yet maybe we do it tomorrow it'd be fun which is you run a mile
you ask yourself how long did that take let's say it took eight minutes then you
walk or rest for eight minutes then you run another mile as fast as you can and
then you rest for the equivalent period and you do that one to three times once
per week so and so as an all-around fitness program it make you could collapse
this into something where you say okay you can work out with the weights for
about an hour every other day maybe take two days off every once well maybe not
you're going to do 6 to 15 repetitions you're going to push to failure on some
of those not all because some of those are designed to build more strength
you're not going to failure and heavier some are designed for hypertrophy higher
rep and going to failure and then on off days you're going to jog for 30 or 45
minutes but for two days a week you're either at the end of your jog or whatever
you're going to do some all-out sprint for 90 seconds and then rest and repeat
and for another day you're going to do these mile repeats that's a pretty that's
a pretty large chunk of exercise movement but if you kind of thread through the
middle of all that what you end up with is some decent strength building
protocols some decent hypertrophy some cardiovascular training that establishes
the so-called a base or a so-called base so you're not going to get really good
at anything you're not going to become a marathoner this way an optimizing
marathon you're not going to optimize powerlifting you're not going to optimize
hypertrophy but for the typical person 75 of people 75 of the time they want
some muscle they want some strength they want some endurance and they want the
capacity to sprint to the to the security gate without um you know leaving a
lung in the terminal so it's like functional stuff like your life going up the
stairs is easier yeah moving about yeah look kind of just regular yeah and i
should mention that cold showers after training don't seem to short-circuit the
um the training effect to the same extent that immersion in cold water does and
that really speaks to the fact that cold showers even though they can provide
some of the adrenaline for the mental effects of like oh i have a lot of
adrenaline in my system from a cold shower and i can remain calm there's utility
to that it's not going to have the same metabolic effects or other positive
effects that cold water exposure has been shown to have and that's unfortunate
because most people have access to cold showers not everyone has access to a
cold dunk or a nice stunk but here in um austin you have this place and no they
don't pay me to say this but i always like going to this place whenever i'm
telling this place kuya and they've got a sauna and a couple ice baths and they
even have those salt tanks that you can float on the device baths there they
have cold water immersion it's pretty cold still haven't done a nice bath really
too yeah i need to yeah you're rushing you'll probably get in and you won't even
yeah what is this what's the big deal exactly or people pay for this i did a
post right of you as a baby yeah it's you know i had to go deep to get that
photo of lex um in a bassinet in the snow yeah because in russia they actually
did this for a long time they thought that it would and indeed it does build the
immune system to expose babies to the cold i don't i still don't know where you
got that photo and you were able to find exactly the right it was it was great
it's great you didn't have a tie on but you had all the look and seriousness
that you do now so it's clearly nature nurture clearly you were born with that
what about sauna he does say that it's good to do heat so there are three ways
you can do sauna that i can just toss out as like brief things if you want to
get a really big growth hormone release for sake of metabolism fat loss you're
training really really hard in jiu jitsu and you want to recover you don't want
a sauna too often because the study that um identified this massive 16-fold
increase in growth hormone they had people do this it's crazy they got into okay
temperatures are 80 to 100 degrees centigrade so that's 176 degrees fahrenheit
to 212 degrees fahrenheit for 5 to 30 minutes is the typical ranges that people
work in in these research studies for maximum growth hormone hormone release
don't do sauna more than once a week but get into the sauna for 30 minutes as
hot as you can safely tolerate so probably for you that'll be 210 because you're
i suspect you'll be on the high end of things then get out for 5 to 10 minutes
no cold exposure get back in the sauna for 30 minutes then they had them do it
again out for five minutes back for 30 minutes out for five minutes back for
three minutes they had them do two hours of sauna exposure to get that growth
hormone release now for the reduction in likelihood of dying of a cardiovascular
event stroke or otherwise the more often you do sauna the better so if you look
at all calls all cause mortality or death due to cardiovascular events and you
look at sauna use frequencies using the same parameters 80 to 100 degrees
centigrade one to seven times per week basically the more often you get into the
sauna for 30 minutes across the week so 30 minutes a day is better than four
times a week four times a week is better than two times a week and two times a
week is better than one and the reductions in mortality are really impressive 27
if you get into the sauna the way i just described not the two hours a day but
30 minutes twice a week or three times per week you reduce the likelihood of
dying of a cardiovascular event by 27 percent if you do it four or more times
per week you reduce the probability of dying by 50 of a cardiovascular event and
in these studies they rule out other things that people are doing smoking they
even ask them do you live in an apartment are you in a happy relationship like
they evaluate other potentially confounding variables now for people that don't
have access to a sauna a hot water bath or hot tub is going to be your next best
bet and if you don't have access to that do like the wrestlers do which is you
know put on two sets of uh sweats and a hoodie and a stocking cap and wrap
yourself in plastics underneath all that and go for a run but don't please
nobody die of hypothermia i mean you can die of warming up too much is this
experience um pleasant or stressful in the way so is it as stressful as an ice
bath okay great question people always ask how cold to make the ice bath or the
cold water or the shower you want it to be uncomfortably cold meaning you want
to feel like i really want to get out but you can safely stay in and that's
going to vary by person and experience with it experience yeah with the sauna
it's the same thing how hot to make it well don't kill yourself obviously be
smart if you're pregnant you shouldn't be doing this anyway but it's very clear
that what you need is the release of something called dinorphin we have
endorphin which makes us feel good it binds to these mu opioid receptors in the
body you have dinorphin which is the terrible feeling that you get when you're
in really hot temperatures it's also the terrible effect that alcoholics feel
when they are in withdrawal you feel agitated you want to get out it's really
unpleasant it's dinorphin binding to the so-called kappa opioid receptor is
that's what you're trying to trigger when you do that a number of things happen
you set off heat shock proteins that go repair broken proteins and misfolded
proteins it also makes it so that later endorphin binds its receptor more
strongly so when you have this uncomfortable experience in the heat you
literally feel better in real life when pleasurable vents come on when you
experience them in the same way i like to say this that when you get into a cold
ice bath or cold shower the increase in epinephrine and dopamine is two to three
hundred percent these are huge increases and they last many hours this is shown
because lately i've been getting a little bit of pushback on twitter that which
is you know um interesting place um people say well that's just in mice no all
the studies i just referred to are all done in humans men and women fairly broad
age ranges so you want to be uncomfortable in the cold you want to be
uncomfortable in the heat this is why i'm not a big fan of infrared saunas
because they only go up to about 160 170 degrees infrared light and far red
light of all kinds has been shown to be beneficial for wound healing acne skin
eyes there are even guys now putting on their testicles because it can increase
testosterone and sperm production yeah hormone release hormone release but in
terms of the sauna you want that strong heat stimulus yeah and that's when you
get crawl up to the 200 mark and so on whenever i'm in new york and there's also
one in san francisco although the one in san francisco is is clothing optional
just to warn people there's a place called archimedes banya is there any
scientific evidence that being naked is beneficial in the sauna well in certain
contexts it leads to um childbirth okay i'll have to read up on that i read that
song but um i suppose it's not required right for childbirth but um but in all
seriousness you know in new york i'll go to a place called spa 88 and actually
uh khabib's picture is on the wall he goes there and it's a it there that one
it's clothing they require clothing i always just say that because it can be a
little bit of a shock to people sometimes if they kind of walk in there a bunch
of naked people the one in san francisco i if i go i'm clothed mostly because
you know i run into co-workers or things like that you know i i sort of more
old-fashioned in that way i suppose but um do you like to wear clothes they're
on co-workers yes yeah in general yeah i mean it's just to me it just seems like
you know that just be aware but but nonetheless the banyas have very hot saunas
because they're russian owned and in new york there's one on the lower east side
but the spy 88 place they have some saunas that the moment i get into those i
have a hard time catching a full breath it burns they've got a cold dunk that's
like a shock and then they've got a sauna wet sauna steam room that's a little
mellower so the nice thing about abania is you can kind of find your place and
then they do the plaza where they take the eucalyptus leaves and you can pay
someone and you basically you cover your groin and then they beat you with the
the the leaves and it's supposed to bring the vasculature to the surface i've
only done it once and frankly i found it to be a little bit um unnerving i
didn't really like the experience but i i'll try and get into a sauna as often
as i possibly can which is you know once or three times per week and i try and
do the cold exposure shower or immersion but early in the day because it really
wakes you up one of my favorite things i've listened to i wish there was a video
is uh listening to a bunch of stuff with rick rubin and um he did a thing with
tim ferriss like the tim ferriss podcast i don't know if you've ever heard it
but he he forced them to do they did the podcast in a sauna and i don't think at
the time tim ferriss was adapted yeah if you're not heat adapted it can be
pretty stressful and i mean obviously the whole experience is stressful as a
somebody with with microphones like what what is happening but i just love that
tim was vulnerable enough to kind of give themselves over to whatever the hell
this experience is and i i'm just so happy that rick like pushed that kind of
idea and just let's let's do it that's a very rick rubin kind of thing to do and
we must not we like we must do this this has to be done uh a podcast that was
done from asana continuously would be really interesting like you could call it
like the pressure cooker or something oh i mean like a regular pocket yeah like
you have to sit with your guests in the sauna um or they have to sit in the
sauna well that was one of the interesting things is um it was a sad thing
because i believe there's no video of that podcast but you could tell there was
a kind of there was suffering and especially it was like a degradation he he
started over time not being able to put words together correctly which he's very
eloquent and so you could see there's like there's a struggle heat and cold pull
you down from the inside you have to i mean there's a reason why the screening
process for um make you know sealed steel they call it seal training but it's
really screening and training involves cold waters because you know if you're in
the heat too long you'll die or damage tissue in cold you can do it quite
extensively before you die or damage tissue but it is stressful i was going to
say one thing that um i sometimes enjoy seeing these social media posts where
people get into the ice bath they'll look really stoic like they're really tough
um but actually that's the wimpy way to go through it when you get into cold
water if you stay very still you develop a thermal sheath around you that you're
warming yourself the the really bold way is to get in and continue to sift your
arms and legs and it ends up feeling miserably colder and there's no sheath
because you're breaking they're bringing up that thermal layer and then when you
get out you'll notice a lot of people huddle or they'll they'll put or they'll
grab the towel in general that's me i'll get back i'll get into the sauna but if
you really want to stimulate the big increases in metabolism you stand out there
and you dry off with arms extended in open air and as that water evaporates off
you it is really cold but your body is forced to activate a number of the
warming programs related to metabolism this is the beautiful work of a woman
named susannah soberg who's scandinavian she published this paper last year in
cell reports medicine and so i call this the soberg principle which is if you're
doing ice and heat for whatever reason it doesn't matter if you end on heat or
cold but if you're using cold specifically to stimulate an increase in
metabolism end with cold that's the sobering principle and with cold yeah if
you're alternating and then uh if you want to do the tough way you let the
shivering so you just stand out and let the water evaporate yeah i mean if you
ever waded into a cold ocean you know everybody's kind of like holding
themselves you know if you really just if you let yourself extend your limbs and
move them around a bit so you break up that thermal layer uh that's that's the
tough way to do it so when i see people on social media getting in and they're
like really tough and trying to look hard yeah you want to be moving around yeah
smiling talking moving around is way way colder yeah are you able to talk can
you do so you suggest a podcast in the in the sauna how about this i proposed
this since i got you you want to do the next podcast i'll get two so the folks
from the plunge uh maybe could bring lexa a plunge he certainly uh deserves one
and uh we can go side by side coffin style or we can face one another well we
said we should do each other's podcasts and maybe next year i can't wait to have
you back on i mean we only scratch the surface well let's do at least part of
the next human lab podcast either in the i have a sauna and a cold plunge so we
could do yeah yeah we could do we do a sauna and a cold plunge version i wonder
the recording how the recording works if they were a bit of an echo in the sauna
i'm sure we can take out the reverb uh so sergey wants to ask you about sex
performance uh very journalistic very hardcore hitting questions that we have
here generally or a specific uh no he has a certain problem he needs help with
no uh generally you haven't done an episode on sex well we did an episode early
on on sexual development yes we've done them on optimizing testosterone and
estrogen and we touched a little bit on the uh on libido and somewhat on sex
performance but not much we did an episode on relationships love and desire
where we touched on libido specifically so just as a quick mention of something
a lot of people take ssris or antidepressants that can disrupt sexual function
there are a few compounds like maca root and tonga ali and things like that that
at least in a few studies in humans have been shown to offset some of the the
sexual side effects now in terms of sexual and then sorry the episode on sexual
development was about how the brain and body become organized in certain ways
how the brain becomes organized if you have x chromosomes or y chromosomes or et
cetera so early early early development mainly and the effects of hormones later
on that template we will be doing a i'm actually putting together a series on
sexual health everything from the menstrual cycle which both men and women
should understand of course um understanding arousal understanding for instance
a lot of people don't realize this but that orgasm is actually the consequence
of activity in the sympathetic meaning the stress arm of the autonomic nervous
system whereas arousal is the consequence of the activity of the parasympathetic
the calming aspect of the of of the autonomy that's counterintuitive right it's
counterintuitive and it kind of works like a seesaw i mean there's arousal then
there's relaxation then there's arousal but the um and then immediately after
orgasm and in males ejaculation what ends up happening is there's a rebounding
of the parasympathetic nervous system which it leads to oftentimes people
feeling very relaxed or falling asleep so i'm going to do a short series on
sexual health that will be that will include stuff about sexual performance but
also um some i i'm working on getting a an expert guest who can talk about some
of the neurologic changes that happen um as a consequence of sexual activity and
we did an episode with uh a guy from ut austin here david buss who's
evolutionary psychologist talking about um we went pretty deep into some of the
uh typical and unusual dynamics of of mating relation whether or not people have
kids or not and what impacts that but we're going to do an episode on menopause
andropause what's very surprising is i get a lot of questions about sexual
health from the young male audience [Music] which tells me that well here's what
i think it reflects i think that women because of their menstrual cycles early
on start to talk to one another about changes in physiology and psychology as a
function of this 28-day cycle that they all experience sooner or later males
there's less of a conversation and it usually arrives in code people say hey
what should i take to increase my testosterone and i'll say well maybe nothing
you know what are you specifically concerned about and then over time if you
pull on those threads a little bit you know you get your answer sometimes i'll
just get a direct question um but i think that the psychology of all this and in
terms of jealousy and the terms of notions of roles and relationships is very
dynamic right now and i'm fascinated by this so we're going to do a four-episode
series what about sexual fantasy what uh to get freudian for a second what role
does sexual fantasy have in the human condition there's a book called the erotic
imagination it's a very psychoanalytic book written by a psychoanalyst that
talks about um how well here's the uncomfortable reality freud was at least
right about one thing which is that the brain circuitry that you used to develop
attachments to your caregivers mother and father or other caregivers do not
disappear when you hit puberty they are repurposed for romantic and sexual
relations and so this is why the whole notion of anxious attached and secure
attached you know stems from childhood attachment patterns but it carries over
to romantic relationships so that the relationship with your mother has and
father has a and probably other close people to you and your young age has a
secondary tertiary some kind of ripple effect on how your sexuality developed
like what fantasies you might have all that oh without question and of course
early experiences too and traumatic or positive or neutral the thing that's
really important to remember though in this transfer of circuitry from one role
to another is that and it's certainly consistent with psychoanalysis that gender
is interchangeable sex is interchangeable so for instance let's say you had a
wonderful relationship let's say this hype let's take a hypothetical person okay
i'm truly not referring to myself let's take a a a young woman who has a
wonderful relationship to her father and a just absolutely terrible abusive
relationship to her mother just for sake of example she then goes into adulthood
and she is drawn to very abusive men not always but let's just use in this
example and the dynamic is exactly the same as the dynamic she had with her
mother that's actually a common occurrence even though in this context she's
heterosexual she's romantically attracted to men what is seen over and over
again is that the dynamic with one parent can be transferred onto a romantic
dynamic but it doesn't have to be you know that if it was with the mother then
it only has to do with relationships to women so gender is interchangeable
because these circuitries are pre-sexual they're laid down in our brain before
the brain has any concept of sexual interactions it's pre-pubertal excuse me and
so um there are a lot of interesting examples and data to support this the book
attached is a pretty interesting book by two psychologists one i think is at
columbia university um that talks about how childhood dynamics uh carry over to
adult uh romantic attachment so as you can tell i get pretty alert in response
to these questions i get a lot of them really in this domain and they have a lot
of impact on people and they're wondering about they want to learn and no one
knows what other people are doing or what's normal we kind of know deviancy we
know perversion we know the extremes yeah we know the rules hopefully people
know the rules but you know let's just be there are a lot of people in in the
academic community in particular at certain east coast schools not to be named
that are in open relationships this is more common now um it's not very common
but it's more common yeah and you know obviously that's a way of bypassing some
of these more primitive emotions about jealousy etc and leveraging them towards
maybe even ongoing relationships i'm not passing judgment one way or the other i
always say four conditions have to be met for any discussion about about sex and
sexuality or sexual health age appropriate context appropriate consensual and
species appropriate well that that's weird because the the thing i'm trying to
figure out is why my sexual fantasy is to go to uh furry orgies and have sex
well with others dressed as squirrels and me uh the other animals so that could
be that i have to i'll see a therapist uh about that one okay i'm not gonna
respond to that except to say that um as long as those four conditions are met
yeah consensus is species appropriate so there's a bunch of questions on i uh on
instagram one of them on this topic on relationships uh somebody suggested to do
a part three of why lex is single there's a running joke about this uh so yeah
but i can answer it in part right yeah because well partially because you're
very busy partially because um you've decided that until it's time you're gonna
wait until it's time it's time right i mean until it's time you're waiting and
then um you're not saving yourself for marriage uh i think but but in some sense
um yeah your your wife your future wife is out there oh yeah yeah she's being
programmed no i uh i mean i definitely i definitely believe that i mean first of
all i i just love people and i fall in love very easily with people with objects
with things with with life with every moment and that way you're like oliver
sacks he fell he would fall in love with minerals and concepts and things like
that and so like to me this kind of uh so relationship is more like a commitment
to one particular kind of um object of your love like uh it's almost like a it's
like a journey that you take on together because also the interesting thing
about humans is they're moment by moment a different person day by day week by
week month by month they change they evolve there's an ups and downs and stuff
like that so you're what you're doing is you're saying well i'm going to explore
all the ways that this human gets morphed and changed and the what makes them
cry what makes them excited what makes them uh lonely uh like the the the habits
how like when they form certain habits what how they feel when those habits are
broken like the stupid my new things that make everyday life you're gonna be on
that journey together figuring that out just the way we're trying to figure
ourselves out when we're like optimizing these things about diet and health so
on you're kind of doing this computation together because neither person really
understands themselves um at all and you're together both confused about each
other and you get to almost like um a relationship is a chance to understand
yourself and to understand another person like together that process is some
kind of someone iterative you know the dynamics right i mean you're merging two
nervous systems one this was once described to me very well by an ex-girlfriend
um who's truly brilliant she's really brilliant um she said you know there's
four arrows this is maybe to an engineer or like a so makes sense there's how
you feel towards the other person yes there's how they feel towards you but then
there's an there's an arrow that comes back to you which is how you feel about
how they feel and then they have an arrow of how they feel about how you feel
right this is why if someone else is moody or somebody else is upset it there's
one version of ourselves where we respond to that or they respond to us but
there's another version where we respond to that but it's also there's a
processing of what it means for us that they're behaving that way or feeling
that way and this again leads us back to that early attachment circuitry because
if a parent was stressed the child's role is not to soothe the parent in fact
healthy models of parenting say that children shouldn't actually know how their
parents feel for like the first eight years of their life they're not supposed
to be in that mindset of empathizing for the parent this is often not the case
but maybe the cutoff isn't exactly eight but you get the idea so the dynamics of
a relationship are where the learning is because we learn how we react to other
people reacting it's it's not a just a two arrow system it's at least this four-
arrow thing um but there's also the element of nurturing right i mean i think
that um going through life with somebody is so much better than going through it
alone and i i never thought i'd make that statement um so it wasn't always
obvious to you no it wasn't always obvious to me i've been i've really enjoyed
wonderful relationships um and some have been hard and and there's been
certainly been a lot of growth i'm on good terms with almost all my former
girlfriends um and close with some enough that i'm i know their spouses and i'm
close with their families and um but no it wasn't and i think that uh when
people say relationship is hard the only really hard part about of a good
relationship is just dealing with oneself and making sure that you're staying in
that mode of caretaking because i do believe that if one is mainly focused on
taking good care of the other person provided they're also focused on taking
good care of you to some extent and we're good at taking care of ourselves
everybody flourishes everything gets better but no i don't think i experienced
that until fairly recently um what do you think is the uh secret to a successful
relationship there isn't just one but at at least at in the top five is master
or at least be good at autonomic self-regulation know how to calm yourself down
don't expect the like looking to anything external to soothe yourself is it puts
you in a terrible position to to be a caretaker of yourself and other people
right so learn how to self soothe right learn how to calm your mind steady your
actions steady your voice there are tools to do that we talk about in the
podcast but elsewhere have that in place i also think that if if your main focus
is on you want to have good boundaries etc but on tending to the relationship
doing a little bit more than you think you ought to do if everyone does that it
goes great i mean i'm sometimes so positively struck by how supported i feel um
because for many years i was just kind of doing everything on my own so any
little thing i'm like oh my goodness this feels huge and also i think the
dynamics have to be right let's let's be really honest this is a little bit of a
tricky topic but um there is a power dynamic in relationships sometimes not all
but in some relationships it works much better if one person leads and the other
person follows in other relationships it's more mutuality works best people need
to know what they need and so knowing what you need and what you crave is really
important and then once you do that you can create the relationship you want
i've seen that over and over again and people are different but i think that um
ultimately i mean right it's it's there's the dopamine phase of a relationship
and then there's the serotonin phase the kind of more mutuality coziness and
sweetness there's a great book about how to make sure that the dopamine
component and the serotonin component so to speak go on forever and it has to do
with you know when you first meet someone you're attracted to them you're
essentially objectifying them you meaning not in the way people might think you
are not dependent on them for emotional stability or survival as you get close
with somebody you really come to depend on them and then you tend to objectify
them less and so this book the book is the name is kind of corny but it's
written by an analyst again it's called can love last and it's a book about how
really good strong relationships are the consequence of people constantly moving
through this dependency objectification dynamic and i use those words in the
true in the psychological sense not in the way they're typically thrown around
nowadays so the id you know in some cultures men and women will only touch for
two weeks out of the month and then for the other two weeks the excitement and
the sensuality and all and the sexuality is very heightened and then they go
back to this kind of distancing now i don't think that's feasible for most
people but if you look statistically those relationships tend to last a very
long time with at least reported mutual feelings of intense attraction for many
many many decades so human beings need to learn how to at least understand and
control these dynamics there's a lot of divorce there's a lot of cheating
there's a lot of stuff out there it'd be great if people could resolve some of
this stuff inside of the relationship in my opinion yeah and this kind of
intense attraction i there's uh actually uh one of the poems that carl uh
daiseroth introduced me to i think two english poems is the name but one of the
things i find myself for prolonged periods being attracted to is like you notice
some kind of magic and you keep wanting to dig to the depths like of that magic
trying to really to really know a person deeply yeah you notice something yeah
early on sure i don't know what that is but you just notice something special
and you want to keep pulling at that thread and you never really do well you
also have to be careful you know i get a lot of questions from god you have to
be careful the questions you ask in a relationship too you have to make sure you
really want that information and it's not just about people's past right if you
ask somebody how they really feel about something about you and they tell you
that may be soothing it may be intensely stressful you have to be here's one
thing i know for sure for a relationship to work you have to be brave you can't
go in there fully protected and yet you also can't go in there with no
boundaries because you'll end up beat up what's that quote if you want to be a
warrior prepare to get hurt if you want to be an explorer prepare to get lost
and if you want to be both you know and if you become a lover prepare to beat
both or something something like that i forget what this is one of these
instagram type things that you see passing by and you know that's pretty true
love scary because it takes us back to that primitive circuitry that is as
primitive and basic as hunger thirst the desire for heat when we're cold the
desire for cold when we're overly warm it's a it's dynorphin i mean when
somebody leaves like the you know when somebody you are attached to leaves by
death or by decision or you're forced apart the dinorphin release is a massive
it is true discomfort people feel anxiety and discomfort and moving through that
is a hell of a process i mean if i knew how to best break up at a neurological
level or if you could just plug yourself into a wall and reset i mean i i'd do
that episode tomorrow but we don't have that knowledge come on the uh i think
we've covered this before and it's even been munified i think losing love is
part of the magic of love it means you've felt something i agree but at some
point like have you done it enough times you know life is finite you know it is
beautiful to see these couples that seem very much in love despite many years
but despite having been together many years yeah the way they look at each other
yeah they'll say they still see the magic yeah and they'll say we got lucky or
it was it's been hard or this and that i think external conditions being a
little tougher is helpful for a couple hardship i do i do because i think that
you rally you know you you and you bond with people you know being obviously you
want to survive those conditions but um yeah i do i think that bonnie and clyde
so and they were a little a little too much well a little bit too much they were
at sociopaths but the uh well when two sociopaths finally can make you do crazy
normally it's interesting normally sociopaths don't team up because they because
they manipulate each other sociopaths sadly are um are usually only interested
in manipulating the highly pliable or unsuspecting um but when romantic
attraction is woven in then it gets um really diabolical any advice on finding
the love of your life of my life this is this is uh why lex's single response
why any advice yeah actually this comes from a friend of mine who's in a really
excellent marriage um with great kids and family and high demand life it it's a
decision like at some point you just priority you just prioritize it as okay i'm
going to make this happen one way or another and um you don't force the
discovery of that person but i mean i've occasionally said hey i think you
should meet this person or that person and um well it wasn't maybe my judgment
was might have been off but it the timing wasn't right or something but i think
that yeah it's a decision and it also has to do with life structure i mean there
were years so i when i was in graduate school i didn't want a girlfriend i just
wanted to be in lab and i sure i had romantic dating interests but i wasn't
going to meet them through a committed you know live together situation wasn't
where i was at and as a postdoc here things are a little different etc etc so
but at some point it's sort of like what do i want my daily routine to look like
because ultimately a relationship however one structures is gonna be part of
your daily routine so at the point where you're like you know i'd really love to
wake up next to somebody and do blank and blank together and then i'd love to
work and then we meet for dinner and then we you know take the dog for a walk or
take kids out or whatever it happens to be take a trip but do you have to be one
has to be in the mindset of wanting to do couple like things people and a lot of
people don't think about it that way they they either fall into something or
they they don't see the benefits of coupling up i think that the pandemic tuned
people's awareness to the fact that some things are indeed easier on your own it
depends on finances etc etc but a lot of things are made better done with other
people 100 percent but i also so i was very deliberately it's an interesting way
to put it like what do you want your day to look like i think what do you want
your day to look like what you want your life to be i was very deliberately
always uh first of all happy to be alone like a conscious thinking i know a lot
of friends were just unable to be alone i'm able to be alone but i'm much
happier with another person like i'm able to share joy with other humans i look
forward to the day that our kids are rolling jiu jitsu and my kids are you know
hanging out with your kids and um if that notion sounds even remotely
interesting then and fun then then it's sort of like you kind of backpedal from
that and you go how do you get ready first year and think from first principles
about love andrew you're uh thank you for being my friend thank you for being an
amazing human being who's so inspiring to so many people for constantly i told
us the car like one of the things that was really refreshing um about you is
that you uh when i tell you an idea and i tell you a thought when i tell you
something you didn't you you don't shut it down as a first step i'm saying that
that's common in a scientific community that's commonly people around you you're
you're seeing what's the goal there you get excited you get excited together and
that's how you can really uh have a great friendship and a great do create great
stuff together so i i'm deeply grateful for that and just uh for connecting so
many interesting people together you're doing an amazing job man and uh thank
you for existing thank you for being here thank you for talking today and uh
next time i'll see you in the sauna and yeah yeah thanks beth well i want to say
several things first of all thank you for having me on again it's an honor and a
pleasure and i don't say that formally i'd really truly mean it i only the humor
in lab podcast as i always say only exists because you gave me the suggestion
and i'm so grateful that you did so thank you and for doing what you do like you
you are brave and you're first man in and you're just continue to do it just
what as my postdoc advisor used to say whatever you're doing just keep going and
then in terms of our friendship i mean i think uh you know and if you uh if you
don't i'm gonna just keep telling you anyway by texting in person you're an
amazing friend uh there's deep trust there's immense respect and uh i love you
brother i love you too man we did it thanks for listening to this conversation
with andrew huberman to support this podcast please check out our sponsors in
the description and now let me leave you with some words from ralph waldo
emerson it is one of the blessings of old friends you can afford to be stupid
with them i look forward to doing just that in the many years to come a
friendship and fun conversations with andrew thank you for listening and hope to
see you next time

[Watch Video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lvh3g7eszVQ?si=4KhQSVf_IRGsJ33m)